She is Taken in Hand 
by Four of The Girls 



" Welcome, Miss America, to the Back of the Front! We want 
to let you see wire doing our hit." 

"Thanks, my dears! I know you are, and doing it well. 
You sure deserve Uncle s Sam's Best, so here it is." 

The Woman of To-day 



shares with man not only the responsibilities of the vote and the ^ 
work of winning the war, but also his favourite solace^the 
" De Reszke" American Cigarette. The following opinions 
are but a few of those received from well-known men and 
women of to-day. Many others may be seen in other " De 
Reszke" advertisements : — 

Miss Ellis Jeffreys, writes: — 

"Miss Ellis Jeffreys likes the ' De Reszke' American Cigarettes very 
much. Although she generally, smokes Turkish cigarettes, she finds the 
American ones delightful. " 
Edmund Gosse, Esq., writes:— 

"The ' De Reszke ' American Cigarettes are pronounced e.xcellent by all 
those who have tried them." 

Miss Iris Hoey, writes :— ... 

" I enjoyed your ' De Reszke ' American Cigarettes immensely, and most 
of my friends will be your very good customers." 
W. Somerset Maugham, Esq., writes :— 

"I have found the 'De Reszke' American Cigarettes very mild and r 

pleasant to smoke." ^^ 



G 



K 



■^ 



Women's War Services 

Women are urgently requir-d to help 

the Navy — the Army — and the .Air 

Force. 

Join To-day 

the 

W. R. N. S. 

(Women's Royal Naval Service) 

Q. M. A. A. C. 

(Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corp^) 
or the 

W. R. A. F. 

(Women's Royal Air Force) 
Full particulars from the nearest 

EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGE 

Ask at Post Office for the address. 





10 for 9id 20 for 1/7 50 for 3/11 

Sold at all Military Canteens at Home and Overseas, also 

Tobacconists and Stores. 

Or post free from J. Millhoff & Co., Ltd. (Dept. 3), 

86, Piccadilly, London, W. i. 

DeReszfe* ^American 

CIGARETTES 



XVI 



The English Review Advertiser 



WHEN VICTORY COMES 

By 

H. DENNIS BRADLEY 

DAWN I 

The birth of a new world. 

The world of Youth. 

A world in the birth throes of new 
and clean ideals born of the agony of 
years of bleeding and suffering. 

The birth of Love. 

After Ages of Pain. 

When Victory comes, and the foul 
menace of militarism is swept aside ! 

When Youth, the fetters struck from 
his limbs, the bandage loosed from his 
eyes, no longer gagged, a slave, stretches- 
his weary limbs, gazes at the man- 
mutilated earth, and lifts his eyes to 
the Sun. 

When the tortured world grows once 
more glad. 

When the sap rises, the buds burst 
into leaves, the blossoms open, and 
peaceful skies ring with ecstatic songs 
of mating birds. 

When a veil of flame-like flowers 
and cool green grasses is cast over the 
scarred and blistered battlefields. When 
children's laughter rings once more in 
ruined places and lovers make their 
tryst where desolation made its home. 

When Victory comes. 

The Victory that Youth has fought 
for, bled, and died for. 

The Victory of Youth — Love. 
» * » 

'' Victory ? " 

In the Council chambers the shrill 
triumphant squeals of the old men will 
issue forth. " It is our Victory ! Ix)ok 
what we have gained ! " 

And Youth, fresh from the memories 
of the blood, the lice, the stench, the 
unspeakable filth, will listen with the 
smile of mockery to the sterile pipings 
of " Victory ! Victory is ours ! " from 
gnarled and skinny throats. 
Youth alone has paid the price and alone will claim the Victory. Youth has for years 
been stricken down, bound hand and foot, hemmed in, thwarted, tongue-tied. Youth has 
wondered, questioned, fought and sought for some cleansing in the blood-bath. Youth has 
gained the Victory and brought an end to the Sacrifice, to the Holocaust of the boyhood 
of the world. 

Youth has given everything, while Age, giving nothing, has taken all. And when Age 
croaks despairing, " We have won the great Victory," they will be unheeded. Age has ruled 
in the past by Hate, and the world is weary of Hate. Youth will rule in the future by Love. 
And Love is not for the old, the impotent, the sterile. The boastful cries from withered throats 
will be unheard, drowned by the fierce pipings of Pan. 

Victory means Peace, and Joy, and Life, and Love — a world which seeks beauty and does 
not goad to deeds of ugliness. , 

And Youth, his limbs unshackled, no more the slave of Age, his soul his own, is once 
more free and Lord of Life. 
Then Victory comes. 
Victory ! 

• . • * 

And Love, crowned in roses, laughs aloud. 

The rising sap, the mating birds, the bursting blossoms, the young things in the fields. 

No longer now the envious hand of Age has power to tear the lover from his mate, to 
poison sacred wells of love with Death, and spoil each love embrace with tortured fear that 
it may be the last; to crush the heart of woman with the dread her child may never hold 
its father's hand. , 

When love is bom again. 

After the ages of pain. 

When Victory comes and Youth and Love can reign. 

When Youth returns to the arms of the Beloved. 

When long-craved hope is won. Wonderful hope, revelling in greatness. Wild, throbbing, 
absorbing, rising to a shout of joy. Intoxicated by power. Passionate ! Overwhelming ! 
Sweeping aside convention, tradition, all that is old, all that has lived and is dead. 

The birth of a new world. 

A world of Love. 

So Victory Comes! 




These impressions are not merely idealistic; thev are written with a deet 
and personal knowledge of the mind o/ the fighting man silently enduring 
hell, and with a great sympathy for Youth who is paying the whole 
price in the World Tragedy. — H. D. -B. 14, Old Bond Street, W. i. 



THE 

ENGLISH REVIEW 

November, 191 8 

Promise of Spring, 191 8 

By Stephen Southwold 

I, 

The boy-sun laughs, and Day 

Scatters his beams 

Where the youngUng shadows play; 

And in the wounded fields 

The new buds break, and pout 

Their lips to the morning's kiss. 

And where 

But yesterday a thousand loves and dreams 

Moved to their close, 

The rusted wire is fair *» 

With heedless greenery. 

And soon the rose 

Shall make of this 

Mould of young sacrifice a flaming rout 

Of passionate bloom that yields 

The largesse of their brief mortality. 

II. 

And wondrous, clear, across the breeze 
Again I hear the Suffolk seas. 
And fair and fleet over the grass 
I hear the feet of children pass. 
And where I stand, by many graves, 
Are cliffs and sand, and hurrying waves. 
And where the guns lie hid to slay 
The river runs through yesterday. 

o 



314 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

III. 

What matter, if to-day be boon, 

The threat and bode 

Of other dawns. To-morrow is a toy 

Tossed to a fearful child : 

The good shall sin 

To-morrow, and the free 

Shall clank their chains 

And sing of liberty : 

The lifeless earth shall spin 

To its frore end. To-morrow's massy load 

Shall stoop the backs of riper fools. The stains 

Of our spill'd wine to-day shall make a joy 

To stir the unborn with a burning tune. 

And snare the white feet of the undefiled. 

IV. 

And one there is 
Whose eyes were wet 
Under my kiss, 

Margaret! 

1 may not slake 
My throat of fire, 
Nor bend nor break 
Thee to desire. 

Yet thou shaft find, 
When I am sped, 
No vows may bind 
The hungry dead. 

V. 

They will remember for a passing spell. 

Ere the June roses fail ; 

Between a dawn and setting of the sun; 

For the swift swell 

Of a wild bird's song. 

Reqiember, O remember! All the earth 

Is hungered of forgetting ! 

One new Spring 

Must cover all thy wrong. 



LONDON 315 

Children's quick feet shall tread 

Thy shadowy sorrows down; 

And one by one 

Each birth 

Shall scatter, like the blown 

Clocks o' the field, the tale 

Of thee and me forgotten, being dead. 



France, March, 19 18. 



London 

By Lt. L. R. Abel Smith 

The men are drab. 

Their faces are gashed and torn with dulness, 

Furrowed with boredom; 

Their minds, their clothes and their faces are drab, 

Dun-coloured, like sun-baked peat. 

They weary me; 

I love bright colours, manifold mounds and slopes, 
The trees' foliage in autumn, old red walls, 
And very ancient houses in the smiling country. 
I can bear no longer to look at the drab men, 
They madden me ... . 

Yet most — all save the drunkards, lecherers, animal-men- 

Have strangely distant eyes, 

Tied to horizons, 

Filled with spaces 

Unimaginable. . . . 

They, too, love colour, and the country. 

The poor drab men. 

Damn them ! they do not look at me — 
They look far away : 
Am I, too, drab? 

o 2 



The Soldier's Return 

By Major H. V. S. Carey 

What shall we render when the men return from war- 
The men who fought that this, our land, might live? 
Is there too much — too much in kind, in deed — 
For they who lived in Hell, that we can give? 

Some sturdy cheers; a pittance, charity or praise, 
With waving flags for strife no longer feared, 
Forgotten as the past, and unredeemed — 
The broken pledge that trusting men have heard. 

Yes, they are conscious of the fate there is in store 
For men who sacrifice the ease-worn way; 
Who, fighting in the dark before the dawn, 
Reap for the craven the safety of the day. 

Deep in some hearts is mammon still entrenched, 
The trader's mart, the gods of gold and clay; 
They have not found the vision of the soul 
Revealed to those who walk the hero's way. 

Yet it shall pass, if one, the least, shall fall 
Broken and maimed, unheeded by the State, 
All we have suffered, spent and hardly won 
Shall by our deeds become the sport of Fate. 

Then through the land a fiery cross will rage, 
Fierce righteous wrath with stern consuming speed, 
Shall sweep away those at the reckoning hour, 
Who debts of plighted honour failed to heed. 



A Summer Wind 

By Gertrude Bone 

Choric I surge, upbearing sounds of others' music, 
Tuneless I am till deep desire awake me, 
A soundless organ-pipe, staying the singing 
Of each musician. 

Silent is Winter's peevish chiding trumpet, 
Call of full floods and clang of tyrannous sea, 
Paean long sounded : soft now comes entreaty 
Like rising fragrance. 

No ring of Autumn with his stiff gold armour; 
Sun-tinctured Summer all alight with flowers, 
Light shaking, and the delicate-winged glancing 
Of humming flies. 

Soft-roofed woods that cover up a shadow, 
Screening it close lest any sunlight see; 
Where all day long the poplar tells the ring-dove 
Of cooling water. 

Full-hearted laugh, wide sunlight in the pasture. 
And the thin wail of scythes and twittering grass. 
And a gay song all unaware its music 

Plaineth some drowned one. 

Generous bright water, rushing in a rapture, 
Gone as ye fall, your covering rainbow hides 
The issuing river of your headlong giving 
Singing far distant. 

Tender I stoop upon the fecund Summer, 
Guiding her tendrils, light to stir the pollen, 
While she, all-glowing, sighs her happy burden 
Of dear fruition. 

All full desire I sound : love-throated singing 
Of birds in happy iCoverts, all full-flowering; 
All lovely forms I fill and make them vocal, 
I, all the spirit. 



Winter Nights 

By Ernest Blake 

When winter nights are wild and stars shine clear 
'Tis snug to shelter deep in woods, and hear 
The rude wind winnowed by the plumed pines, 

Till the blind din of his diapason 
To infinite small whisperings declines, 
Like elfin waves awash round islets lone, 
Aloof in Ocean's furthest hemisphere. 

Then with a pagan joy my spirit sings, 
I feel the fire of elemental things 
Enkindle all those keen intolerant eyes, 
The stars, and light, o'er dim expectant skies, 
Waver and wane like breath of passionate flowers. 
And Earth, half-conscious of her slumbering powers, 
Tremble with mute immense imaginings. 



The Use of War 

By Major H. F. Constantine 

When the dark cloud of war burst on the stricken world, 
Men said, to solace others and themselves, that from this evil 
Good would come; that warring mankind, ennobled by 

endeavour 
And the hardships and dangers of the war, would come 
To a higher level of thought and action. But has that been? 
It is true that men have suffered, and have known how fear, 
Black foe to human reason, brings bondage on the soul. 
Have they learnt aught else? The brave have been brave, 
The pure have been pure, and the generous have laid down 

their lives. 
But all those others, neither generous nor pure of heart, 
Neither brave nor clear of brain, have they altered ? 
What good has come to them? Who knows? 
Not you, nor I, nor all the busy scribes of England. 



Introduction to Studies in Classic 
American Literature 

By D. H. Lawrence 

I. 

The Spirit of Place. 

It is natural that we should regard American literature as a 
small branch or province of English literature. None the 
less there is another view to be taken. The American art- 
speech contains a quality that we have not calculated. It 
has a suggestive force which is not relative to us, not inherent 
in the English race. This alien quality belongs to the 
American continent itself. 

All art partakes of the Spirit of Place in which it is 
produced. The provincial Latin literature ferments with a 
foreign stimulus. It is Africa, and the mysterious religious 
passion of Libya, which, voicing itself in Latin, utters the 
infant cry of Tertullian, Augustine, Athanasius, the great 
^saints of the African Church. These are not Romans. They 
are the prelude to a new era. It is not only that they utter 
the ideas which made Europe. Chiefly in them is felt the first 
throb osf the great mystic passion of mediaeval life. And in 
Apuleius, decadent and sensuous, we feel the last throb of 
the old way of sensuality, Babylon, Tyre, Carthage. Africa, 
seething in Roman veins, produces these strange pulses of 
new experience, incipient newness within the old decadence. 

In the same way America, the new continent, seething in 
English veins, has produced us the familiar American 
classics, of Hawthorne, Poe, Whitman, or Fenimore Cooper, 
for example. We read the English utterance without getting 
the alien American implication. We listen to our own speech 
in American mouths, but our ears have been shut to the 
strange reverberation of that speech. We have not wanted to 
hear the undertone, the curious foreign, uncouth suggestion, 
which is in the over-cultured Hawthorne and Poe or Whit- 
man. Augustine and Apuleius are both writers of the Roman 
decadence. The orthodox Romans, no doubt, saw mainly 
the decadence, and objected to it. They could not see that 



320 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

the qualities which they called decadence, judging from the 
standards of Virgil and Cicero and Tacitus, were perhaps the 
incipient realities of a whole new era of experience. 

It is time now, for us, who have always looked with in- 
dulgence on the decadent or uncouth or provincial American 
literature, to open new eyes, and look with respect, if not 
with fear. It is time for us now to see that our great race 
experience is surpassed and exceeded. Our race idea may 
apparently hold good in the American mind. What we have 
to realise is that our way of feeling is superseded, just as 
Cicero's way of feeling was superseded in Apuleius. It is 
the quality of life-experience, of emotion and passion and 
desire, which has changed in the Romans of Africa, and in 
the English-speaking Americans. Life itself takes on a new 
reality, a new motion, even while the idea remains ostensibly 
the same. 

And it is this change in the way of experience, a change 
in being, which we should now study in the American books. 
We have thought and spoken till now in terms of likeness and 
oneness. Now we must learn to think in terms of difference 
and otherness. There is a stranger on the face of the earth, 
and it is no use our trying any further to gull ourselves that 
he is one of us, and just as we are. There is an unthinkable 
gulf between us and America, and across the space we see, 
not our own folk signalling to us, but strangers, incompre- 
hensible beings, simulcra perhaps of ourselves, but other, 
creatures of an other-world. The connection holds good his- 
torically, for the past. In the pure present and in futurity 
it is not valid. The present reality is a reality of untranslat- 
able otherness, parallel to that which lay between St. Augus- 
tine and an orthodox senator in Rome of the same day. The 
oneness is historic only. 

The knowledge that we are no longer one, that there is 
this inconceivable difference in being between us, the differ- 
ence of an epoch, is difficult and painful to acquiesce in. 
Yet our only hope of freedom lies in acquiescing. The 
change has taken place in reality. And unless it take place 
also in our consciousness, we maintain ourselves all the time 
in a state of confusion. We must get clear of the old one- 
ness that imprisons our real divergence. 

It is the genuine American literature which affords the 
best approach to the knowledge of this othering. Only art- 
utterance reveals the whole truth of a people. And the 
American art-speech reveals what the American plain speech 



CLASSIC AMERICAN LITERATURE 321 

almost deliberately conceals. What Hawthorne deliberately 
says in " The Scarlet Letter " is on the whole a falsification 
of what he unconsciously says in his art-language. And this, 
again, is one of the outstanding qualities of American litera- 
ture : that the deliberate ideas of the man veil, conceal, 
obscure that which the artist has to reveal. This quality of 
duplicity which runs through so much of the art of the modern 
world is almost inevitable in an American book. The author 
is unconscious of it himself. He is sincere in his own inten- 
tion. And yet, all the time, the artist, who writes as a som- 
nambulist, in the spell of pure truth as in a dream, is 
contravened and contradicted by the wakeful man and 
moralist who sits at the desk. 

The occultists say that once there was a universal mystic 
language, known to the initiated, or to the adept, or to the 
priesthood of the whole world, whether Chinese or Atlantean 
or Maya or Druid — a language that was universal over the 
globe at some period, perhaps before the Flood. This must 
have been a written rather than a spoken language, and must 
have consisted in symbols or ideographs. It is conceivable, 
perhaps even probable, that at one time the priesthoods of 
all the world — Asiatic, African, European, American, Poly- 
nesian — held some common idea of the creation of the Cosmic 
universe, and expressed this idea in the same symbols or 
graphs. It is quite easy to conceive that the circle should 
be a universal symbol for the All, and the rosy cross, and 
the ankh, the Egyptian so-called symbol of life, may have 
been used by all the wise men on the earth to express certain 
cosmological ideas. And it may be possible, as the scientists 
of the subtler psychic activities desire and need to do, to 
discover a universal system of symbology : for practically the 
whole of psychometry and psycho-analysis depends on the 
understanding of symbols. 

But art-speech, art-utterance, is, and always will be, the 
greatest universal language of mankind, greater than any 
esoteric symbolism. Art-speech is also a language of pure 
symbols. But whereas the authorised symbol stands always 
for a thought or an idea, some mental concept, the art-symbol 
or art-term stands for a pure experience, emotional and pas- 
sional, spiritual and perceptual, all at once. The intellectual 
idea remains implicit, latent and nascent. Art communi- 
cates a state of being — whereas the symbol at best only 
communicates a whole thought, an emotional idea. Art-speech 
is a use of symbols which are pulsations on the blood and 

o* 



322 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

seizures upon the nerves, and at the same time pure percepts 
of the mind and pure terms of spiritual aspiration. 

Therefore, when we reduce and diminish any work of art 
to its didactic capacity — as we reduce a man to his mere 
physical-functional capacity in the science of medicine — then 
we find that that work of art is a subtle and complex idea 
expressed in symbols. It is more or less necessary to view 
man as a thing of various functions and organs. And in the 
same way, for certain purposes, it is necessary to degrade a 
work of art into a thing of meanings and reasoned exposition. 
This process of reduction is part of the science of criticism. 

But before we can undertake to criticise American books, 
to discover their symbolic meaning, we must first trace the 
development of the orthodox European idea on American 
soil; because there is always a dual import in these works 
of art : first, the didactic import given by the author from his 
own moral consciousness; and then the profound symbolic 
import which proceeds from his unconscious or subconscious 
soul, as he works in a state of creation which is something 
like somnambulism or dreaming. Also we must wake and 
sharpen in ourselves the subtle faculty for perceiving the 
greater inhuman forces that control us. It is our fatal limita- 
tion, at the present time, that we can only understand in 
terms of personal and conscious choice. We cannot see that 
great motions carry us and bring us to our place before we 
can even begin to know. We cannot see that invisible great 
winds carry us unwitting, as they carry the locust swarms, and 
direct us before our knowledge, as they direct the migrating 
birds. 

We ask ourselves. How was it that America became 
peopled by white men at all? How, in the first place, did 
Europeans ever get across the great blank ocean? The 
Greeks and Romans turned their backs on space, and kept 
their breasts landwards as if magnetised. How was it, then, 
that fifteenth-century Europe looked space-wards? Was it just 
the attraction of space ? Or was it that Spanish and Venetian 
sailors were determined to fill in the great blank of the 
Atlantic Ocean which confronted them? 

It was something more positive. Every people is 
polarised in some particular locality, some home or homeland. 
And every great era of civilisation seems to be the expression 
of a particular continent or continent region, as well as of the 
people concerned. There is, no doubt, some peculiar poten- 
tiality attaching to every distinct region of the earth's surface. 



CLASSIC AMERICAN LITERATURE 323 

over and above the indisputable facts of climate and geo- 
logical condition. There is some subtle magnetic or vital 
influence inherent in every specific locality, and it is this 
influence which keeps the inhabitant stable. Thus race is 
ultimately as much a question of place as of heredity. It is 
the island of Great Britain which has really determined the 
English race, the genius of Place has made us one people. 
The place attracts its own human element, and the race drifts 
inevitably to its own psychic geographical pole. 

We see this in Roman history. We see the city of Rome 
gradually losing its psychic-magnetic polarity, the Roman in- 
dividuals gradually loosed from the old stay, and drifting like 
particles absolved from the original influence, falling imper- 
ceptibly into two currents — one setting northwards towards 
Milan and Gaiil, one setting east towards Constantinople and 
Asia. Africa had always been connected with Rome herself — 
Rome and Carthage were the positive and negative poles of 
a stable, vital current, as were Athens and Sardis or 
Ecbatana. 

After the removal of the Empire to the east a new circuit 
began, the circuit of Rome and Treves, or, better, of Italy 
and Germany. There is, and has been since the break of 
the old Roman-African circuit, a natural and inevitable 
balance between Rome and Germany. 

England, France, and even Spain lay within the 
great German-Italian circuit of vital magnetism, which sub- 
sisted all through the Middle Ages. We can see Spain 
caught in another influence, from Africa again, and Germany 
influenced from the great Slavonic field. But the main 
polarity of Europe, from the time of Diocletian to the Re- 
naissance, lay between Italy and Germany. 

About the time of the Renaissance, however, this circuit 
exhausted itself, as the Italian-African circuit had been ex- 
hausted a thousand years before. Italy suddenly scintillated, 
and was finished in her polar potentiality. The old stability 
of Europe was gone, the old circle of vital flow was broken. 
It was then that Europe fell directly into polar unison with 
America. Europe and America became the great poles of 
negative and positive vitalism. 

And it was on the wings of this new attraction that Europe 
discovered America. When the great magnetic sway of the 
mediaeval polarity broke, then those units which were liberated 
fell under the sway of new vital currents in the air, and they 
were borne helplessly as birds migrate, without knowing or 

o* 2 



324 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

willing, down the great magnetic wind towards America, 
towards the centrality in the New World. So the first indi- 
viduals were caught up and swept overseas in the setting of 
the great current. They had no choice, because the influence 
which was upon them was prior to all knowledge and all 
option. 

Some races of Europe, moreover, seem never to have been 
included in the great Latin- Germanic circuit of cultural 
vitalism. Among these are the Iberian and the Celtic. The 
strange early flowering of Celtic Christianity would be found, 
on examination, to be quite apart from the whole Italian- 
Germanic Christianity which has prevailed in Europe. Its 
first principle was individualistic, separatist, almost anti- 
social, a recoil of the individual into a mystic isolation, quite 
the contrary of the European religious principle, which was 
the fusing into a whole. 

And these separate races located themselves on the sea- 
board, under the influence of the Atlantic Ocean; Spain, 
Ireland, Scotland, England, Brittany, these have lain from 
the beginning under the spell of the great western sea. And 
the people of Spain, dissociated from the circle of Italian- 
German culture, felt most distinctly the pull of the 
American magnetism. And they answered the pull as the 
needle answers the pull of the magnetic north. Spain moved 
across-seas in one great blind impulse, which was not prim- 
arily a desire for wealth. Desire for wealth never shifted 
a nation which was attached to its home, or vital in its own 
home-life. 

If we are to understand the Celtic and Iberian races at 
all, we must realise that they have always remained outside 
of the European circuit of life — that they have always been 
excluded and subjected, never incorporated; and that their 
principle has been one of mystic opposition, even hatred, of 
the civilising principle of the rest of Europe. These races 
have remained true to some principle which was contained 
in the African and the Druid realities, but which has had no 
place in the European Christian-social scheme. Therefore 
they placed themselves in a polarity with the great invisible 
force of America, they looked to their positive pole into the 
west, the land of the setting sun, over the great sea to the 
unknown America. Their heaven was the land under the 
western wave, the Celtic Tir na Og. 

They knew of no America. And yet, in the most imme- 
diate sense, they knew America. They existed in the spell 



CLASSIC AMERICAN LITERATURE 325 

of the vital magnetism of the unknown continent. The same 
is more or less true of Spain and of Scandinavia. These 
great sea-board countries are inevitably controlled by the 
pull of America. It is inevitable that the Vikings should 
sail to Greenland and Labrador. 

This unconscious reaction to the vital magnetism of tKe 
far-off unknown world is perhaps sufficient to have given rise 
to the Atlantis myth. If it gave rise to the land of Tir na 
Og, which lies under the western wave, why not to Atlantis? 
If the great magnetic pole of the Celtic and Iberian psyche 
was away in the west, would it not follow that, as in a dream, 
the myth should interpret the unconscious experience? The 
same would be true of the Norse myths — their polarity is 
westwards, towards America. 

It follows, also, that if the Atlantic sea-board of Europe 
lies under the spell of the far-off American vital magnetism. 
the Atlantic sea-board of America must lie under the spell of 
Europe. And so, when Cortes lands in Mexico, he finds the 
subtle and pathetic Montezuma, the priest-emperor, who re- 
ceives him with mystic sympathy, mystic desire. In America 
a similar break in the circuit of vitalism, a similar shifting 
of the great mystic-magnetic polarity must have taken place, 
in the fifteenth century, as it took place in Europe. And 
as Europe fell under the spell of America, America fell under 
the spell of Europe. So Montezuma embraced the Spanish 
as the fulfilment of the legend of the white, bearded strangers, 
who should come as gods across the east. Legend is sup- 
posed to be race-memory. But surely it is just as likely to 
be a kind of race-clairvoyance. Montezuma, a priest, a 
decadent and sensitive character, was filled with mystic 
apprehension. The Aztecs, subject to the fine vibrations in 
the ether, given off by vital Europe, highly religious and 
mystical in their natures, only expressed in their legend of 
the coming of the white stranger that which their innermost, 
sensitised souls knew beforehand as a fact. If we can under- 
stand the sending of wireless messages from continent to 
continent, can we not much more readily understand that the 
unthinkably sensitive substance of the human intelligence 
could receive the fine waves of vital effluence transmitted 
across the intervening space, could receive, and, as in a dream, 
plainly comprehend? It was not even in symbols that the 
Aztecs knew the future ; but in plain, direct prescience. They 
knew the white, bearded strangers hundreds of years before 
they could see them. And they knew so perfectly because, 



326 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

in their semi-barbaric state, their consciousness was fluid, not 
mechanically fixed, and the rarest impressions upon the 
physical soul, from the invisible ether, could pass on occa- 
sionally into uninterrupted consciousness. 

Prophecy, the mystery of prophecy, is no absurdity. It 
is no more absurd than the sending of a wireless message. 
A people, or an individual, need only most delicately submit 
to the message which is being received all the time upon its 
own finest tissue, and it will be able to prophesy. But it is 
easier for us to invent sensitive machines than to avail our- 
selves of our own extreme and marvellous sensibilities. 

We may see, then, how Spain was called across the 
Atlantic, in the spell of the positive magnetism of the great 
western continent. And we may understand better the de- 
parture of the Pilgrim Fathers. It is not enough, it is never 
enough, upon an important occasion to accept the plausible 
explanation offered by the protagonist. The protagonist will 
always assert that he moves of his own intention. The 
Pilgrim Fathers sailed off in an enthusiastic, stern vigour of 
desire for religious freedom. They sailed to find freedom 
of worship — so they say. But it is a palpable fiction. Be- 
cause at once they instigated the most cruel religious tyranny 
in America, equivalent to the Spanish-American Inquisition, 
Nay, it even seems as if the impulse to religious cruelty came 
to the Spaniards from America, and was exercised secondarily 
by them in Europe. 

The Pilgrim Fathers did not sail to America in search 
of religious freedom. The Pilgrim Fathers, if they had 
wanted this freedom, would have stayed and fought for it, 
with Cromwell. Religious liberty was with them a phrase 
that covered complex motives. For the deepest human soul 
all the while offers specious reasons for her own movement, 
covering beyond all knowledge the true motive. The Pilgrim 
Fathers sternly believed themselves that they sailed in search 
of purer Christian worship and the liberty to that worship. 
It was the innermost soul offering a sufficient pretext to their 
stubborn, self-righteous minds. 

For, if we consider the early American colonies, the 
Pilgrim Fathers were not Christians at all — not in any rea- 
sonable sense of the word. They were no more Christians 
than the dark and violent Spaniards of the Inquisition were 
Christian. At the close of the fifteenth century Spain fell 
back from Christian Europe and became a thing apart. In 
the same way the first Americans departed from the Christian 



CLASSIC AMERICAN LITERATURE 327 

and the European vital mystery. They became dark, sinister, 
repellent. They seemed to seek, not liberty, but a gloomy 
and tyrannical sense of power. They wanted to have power 
over all immediate life. They had a gloomy passion, similar 
to that of some of the African sects of the Early Christian 
Church, to destroy or mutilate life at its very quick, lusting 
in their dark power to annihilate all living impulses, both 
their own and those of their neighbour. For all of which the 
Christian religion served as a word, a weapon, an instrument : 
the instrument of their dark lust for power over the imme- 
diate life itself, as it stirred to motion in the breasts and 
bowels of the living. 

This lust is latent in all religious passion. So long as a 
people is living and generous, it fulfils its religious passion 
in setting free the deep desires which are latent in all human 
souls. Bernard of Clairvaux, St. Francis of Assisi, Martin 
Luther, these were liberators. They made it possible for 
every man to be more himself, more whole, more full and 
spontaneous than ever man had been before. 

But into Puritanism and Calvinism had already entered 
the dangerous negative religious passion of repression, this 
passion which so easily becomes a lust, a deep lust tor vin- 
dictive power over the life-issue. It was on the hard recoil 
of this destructive religious passion that the Pilgrim Fathers 
left Europe. America, dark, violent, aboriginal, w^ould lend 
them force to satisfy their lust of anti-life. 

It is absolutely necessary to realise once and for all that 
every enthusiasm, every passion, has a dual motion : first a 
motion of liberation, of setting free; and secondly a motion 
of vindictive repression of the living impulse, the utter sub- 
jection of the living, spontaneous being to the fixed, 
mechanical, ultimately insane will. 

When at the Renaissance the great religious impulse of 
Europe broke, these two motions became separate. We see 
the Calvinists, the Puritans, the Spaniards of the Inquisition, 
all filled with a wild lust for cruelty, the lust for the power 
to torture, to dominate and destroy the mysterious body of 
life. It is the will of man rising frenzied against the mystery 
of life itself, and struggling insanely to dominate, to have the 
life-issue in unutterable control, to squeeze the mystic thing, 
life, within the violent hands of possession, grasp it, squeeze 
it, have it, have unspeakable power over it. 

Whereas, if we have one spark of sanity, we know that 
we can never possess and direct the life-mystery. The 



328 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

utmost of our power is to possess and destroy. The life- 
mystery precedes us. Our simplest spontaneous movement 
precedes all knowing and willing. Secondly, and afterwards, 
we are conscious, we have voluntary control. Our knowing is 
always secondary and subsequent to our being, which is an 
issue of the creative unknown. And our volition is always 
subsidiary to our spontaneous arrival. 

But there lies latent in the soul of man, at all times, the 
desire to reverse this order. In every man lies latent the 
passion to control and compel the issue of creation, by force 
of the self-conscious will. We have a latent craving to con- 
trol from our deliberate will the very springing and welling- 
up of the life-impulse itself. This craving, once admitted, 
becomes a lust. This lust, once established and dominant, 
carries mankind to unthinkable lengths in the frenzied, 
insane purpose of having the life-issue utterly under human 
compulsion. 

The Jews of old became established in this lust : hence 
their endless purifications, their assertion of control over the 
natural functions; hence also the rite of circumcision, the 
setting of the seal of self-conscious will upon the very quick 
of bodily impulse. The frenzied, self-mutilating Christians, 
the fakir-like saints, such as St. Simeon Stylites, the St. 
Anthony frenzied in celibacy, these men do but assert the 
utter tyranny of deliberate will over every spontaneous, un- 
controllable motion. There must be a measure of control, 
that ever)' deep desire may be fulfilled in its own fulness and 
proportion. But there must never be control for control's sake. 

The great field for the lust of control in the modern world 
is America. Whether we read the history of Spanish America 
or of English-speaking America, it is the same, a dishearten- 
ing, painful record of the lusting triumph of the deliberate 
will. On the one hand, the Spaniards in America, following 
the Spaniards of the Inquisition, lusted in the overweening 
sensual desire for repression of freedom in the spiritual self, 
whereas the North Americans lusted spiritually for utter re- 
pression in the sensual or passional self. 

The New Englanders, wielding the sword of the spirit back- 
wards, struck down the primal impulsive being in every man, 
leaving only a mechanical, automatic unit. In so doing they 
cut and destroyed the living bond between men, the rich pas- 
sional contact. And for this passional contact gradually was 
substituted the m^echanical bond of purposive "utility. The 
spontaneous passion of social union once destroyed, then it 



CLASSIC AMERICAN LITERATURE 329 

was possible to establish the perfect mechanical concord, the 
concord of a number of parts to a vast whole, a stupendous 
productive mechanism. And this, this vast mechanical con- 
cord of innumerable machine-parts, each performing its own 
motion in the intricate complexity of material production, this 
is the clue to the western democracy. 

It has taken more than three hundred years to build this 
vast living machine. It has taken just as long to produce 
the modern Mexican, a creature of incomprehensible sensual 
reactions, barely human any longer. 

But North America has proceeded in one line wonder- 
fully. After only two generations in New England the first 
Yankees noticed that their stock had changed. The sturdy, 
ruddy, lusty English yeoman had disappeared, the long-jawed, 
sallow American took his place, with a pale, nervous women- 
folk such as England has only lately begun to reckon with. 

Uprooted from the native soil, planted in strong abori- 
ginal earth, this thing happened to the English stock. The 
natural impulsive being withered, the deliberate, self- 
determined being appeared in his place. There was soon no 
more need to militate directly against the impulsive body. 
This once dispatched, man could attend to the deliberate 
perfection in mechanised existence. This is what makes good 
business men. And in this the American is like the Jew : in 
that, having conquered and destroyed the instinctive, im- 
pulsive being in himself, he is free to be always deliberate, 
always calculated, rapid, swift, and single in practical execu- 
tion as a machine. The perfection of machine triumph, of 
deliberate self-determined motion, is to be found in the 
Americans and the Jews. Hence the race talent for acting. 
In other races the impulsive mystery of being interferes with 
the deliberate intention of the individual. In these not. 
Only, Americans and Jews suffer from a torturing frictional 
unease, an incapacity to rest. They must run on, like 
machines, or go mad. The only difference between a human 
machine and an iron machine is that the latter can come to 
an utter state of rest, the former cannot. No living thing can 
lapse into static inertia, as a machine at rest lapses. And 
this is where life is indomitable. It will be mechanised, 
but it will never allow mechanical inertia. Hence the 
Orestes-like flight of unrest of Americans and Jews. 

And yet it cannot be for this alone that the millions have 
crossed the ocean. This thing, this mechanical democracy, 
new and monstrous on the face of the earth, cannot be an end 



330 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

in itself. It is only a vast intervention, a marking-time, a 
mechanical life-pause. It is the tremendous statement in 
negation of our European being. 

This sheer and monstrous reflection of Europe, Europe 
in negative reality, reflected to enormity on the American 
continent, will surely vanish swiftly, like one of the horrifying 
dreams. This is not the reality of America. It is only the 
reality of our own negation that the vast aboriginal continent 
reflects back at us. There will come an America which we 
cannot foretell, a new creation on the face of the earth, a 
world beyond us. The early Christianity produced monstrous 
growths, monstrous reflections of the world then dying, dis- 
torted and made huge by the hew spirit. These monstrosities, 
like enormous horrifying phantoms that men do not care to 
remember, disappeared, leaving the new era to roll slowly 
on to the European summer. So the mechanical monstrosity 
of the west will presently disappear. 

It was not for this that myriads crossed the seas, mag- 
netically carried like birds in migration, without knowing why 
or whither, yet conducted along lines of pure magnetic 
attraction, to a goal. Spaniards, Puritans, Jews, Celts, they 
went in recoil of negation from Europe. They went in the 
lust for deliberate control of the living issues : lust for sensual 
gratification in pride or power or slave-tyranny on the part 
of the Spaniards and perhaps the Celts; lust for spiritual 
gratification in the ethical control of all life on the part 
of Jews and Puritans. But this was not the final motive for 
departure. This was the negative impulse. The positive 
is more unsearchable. 

They went like birds down the great electric direction 
of the west, lifted like migrating birds on a magnetic current. 
They went in subtle vibration of response to the new earth, 
as animals travel far distances vibrating to the salt-licks. 

They walked a new earth, were seized by a new electricity, 
and laid in line differently. Their bones, their nerves, their 
sinews took on a new molecular disposition in the new 
vibration. 

They breathed a savage air, and their blood was suffused 
and burnt. A new fierce salt of the earth, in their mouths, 
penetrated and altered the substance of their bones. Meat 
of wild creatures, corn of the aboriginal earth, filled and im- 
pregnated them with the unknown America. Their subtlest 
plasm was changed under the radiation of new skies, new 
influence of light, their first and rarest life-stuff transmuted. 

Thus, through hundreds of years, new races are made. 



CLASSIC AMERICAN LITERATURE 331 

people slowly smelted down and re-cast. There is the slow 
and terrible process of transubstantiation. Who can tell 
what will come at the negative crisis of this reduction ? What 
monstrosity? And, much more, who can tell what will come ^ 
when the new world sets in? 

For every great locality has its own pure daimon, and is 
conveyed at last into perfected life. We have seen Asia, and 
North Africa, and a good deal of Europe. We know the 
white abstraction of the Arctic and Antarctic continents, the 
unspeakable immortality of the ice, where existence is and 
being is not. There remains America, and, beyond, the even 
farther-off Australia. 

Every great locality expresses itself perfectly, in its own 
flowers, its own birds and beasts, lastly its own men, with 
their perfected works. Mountains convey themselves in un- 
utterable expressed perfection in the blue gentian flower and 
in the edelweiss flower, so soft, yet shaped like snow-crystals. 
The very strata of the earth come to a point of perfect, un- 
utterable concentration in the inherent sapphires and 
emeralds. It is so with all worlds and all places of the world. 
We may take it as a law. 

So now we wait for the fulfilment of the law in the west, 
the inception of a new era of living. At present there is a 
vast myriad-branched human engine, the very thought of 
which is death. But in the winter even a tree looks like 
iron. Seeing the great trunk of dark iron and the swaying 
steel flails of boughs, we cannot help being afraid. What we 
see of buds looks like sharp bronze stud-points. The whole 
thing hums elastic and sinister and fatally metallic, like some 
confused scourge of swinging steel throngs. Yet the lovely 
cloud of green and summer lustre is within it. 

We wait for the miracle, for the new soft wind. Even 
the buds of iron break into soft little flames of issue. So 
will people change. So will the machine-parts open like buds 
and the great machines break into leaf. Even we can expect 
our iron ships to put forth vine and tendril and bunches of 
grapes, like the ship of Dionysos in full sail upon the 
ocean. 

It only wants the miracle, the new, soft, creative wind :' 
which does not blow yet. Meanwhile we can only stand and 
wait, knowing that what is, is not. And we can listen to the 
sad, weird utterance of this classic America, watch the trans- 
mutation from men into machines and ghosts, hear the last 
metallic sounds. Perhaps we can see as well glimpses of 
the mystic transubstantiation. 



The Norton Folgate Affair 

By Thomas Burke 

Norton Folgate is a loud London thoroughfare packed with 
poor shops and stalls. Two tawdry music-halls throw upon it 
a thin festal glow. It connects Bishopsgate with Shoreditch. 
It is well acquainted with murder and suicide, and is so 
familiar with burglary and sneak-thievery and the lesser 
offences that the discovery of the bodies in the warehouse 
made little impression on the district, save as a topic for the 
day in the four-ale bars. In three days, after the inquest, it 
was forgotten. 

It is a commonplace story enough. Here are the letters 
and a stray Press item or two in which it is told. 

Well Joe this is a hell of a thing to do, but we are going 
through with it. I got my papers last week. But I am not 
going and I cant go till me and Violet have had a bit of 
time together. Aint it awful we should be like this — always 
at someones beck and call. Oh Joe love does make a differ- 
ence to you. I hope some day you will find a girl — not like 
what we used to click with in Kingsland Road but a real 
girl. Violet was fifteen on Tuesday, so we decided to make 
it that day. I met her as she come from the factory Joe and 
we went a long walk and then a tram ride and then got back 
these parts about midnight. I had got it all fixed. I had 
been looking round for some time and found what we wanted 
where nobody would ever dream of looking for us. It was 
a warehouse Joe just behind Columbia Market but it had been 
empty for a long time. I had got in the night before and had 
a look round and it was all nice and dry on the first floor 
and I found a lot of straw shavings and things and I made 
up a bit of a bed like and tied a lot of it together and made 
hassicks' to sit on and I fixed up a few old planks to make a 
sort of table. Lucky it was warm weather else we should 
have been cold because it wouldnt have done to have started 
a fire in the stove because someone who knew the place might 
see the smoke coming out. Well Joe that is where I took 
her. I had laid in a bit of grub of a sort and at one in the 



THE NORTON FOLGATE AFFAIR m 

morning we sat down there together as cosy as you please 
and had it. We didnt neither of us eat much. We was too 
excited I think. 

Oh Joe we was happy. I hope Joe some day you> will be 
as happy because you have been a good pal to me and I 
always liked you Joe and I want everybody to know how 
happy you can be when you can be together with a girl you 
love and what loves you. Oh Joe I never knew before how 
beautiful things were. I never knew how lovely girls are 
and what a difference comes into a girls face when she looks 
at her boy and nestles up to him. Joe do you remember how 
we used to joke about love and getting married. It seems 
horrible to think of it now. But I hope Joe you wont have 
to hid© like a rabbit and only slink out at nights all because 
you love somebody — that is what we got to do. 

Dear Joe — we have been here twenty-four hours now. I 
suppose V has been missed from the factory and from home 
and I reckon they are wondering where I got to but I know 
you wont give a pal away Joe. 

I slipped out last night to get some more grub in. Good 
job the streets is dark. Anyhow I didnt show my face at any 
shop round here. I went up to Dalston. I couldnt get much 
because we darent use our ration books us being registered 
at local shops for this and that which would have got us 
nabbed if we shown our faces where we was known. But I 
called at Fat Freds place up at Dalston and got some boiled 
beef and pease from him without a coupon. I pumped him a 
bit and he didnt know anything was Vv^rong. There wont be 
nothing in the papers for a bit I suppose but I bet V's father 
will go to the police if she aint home to-night. I managed to 
get some beer and some lemonade and I pinched a glass from 
the lemonade shop. 

Oh Joe when I got back I slipped in quiet like and V 
didnt hear me and what do you think I saw. She was sitting 
on one of the hassicks and just as I got there she reached 
for my old cap — what I thought I hadnt better wear because 
it is a bright brown colour and might be known — and hugged 
it to her and kissed it. Oh Joe I cant tell you what it makes 
a chap feel when he sees his girl do like that. As soon as I 
see what she was doing I slipped out again and come back 
again and made a bit of a noise this time so she would know. 
Oh Joe how I love her. Joe if we was to die at the same 
time I want you to go to her people and mine and make 



334 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

them swear to let us be buried together. You will do this 
for me Joe wont you. You wont let a pal down will you. 
You got to do it in case anything happens. 

I expect her father wont half be wild but if it did happen 
you must tell him it is my wish and V's wish. It is a bit out 
of the ordinary I know but if he loved his daughter and 
wants to do something to make up for those awful bruises 
that she carries on her arms and legs from him I think he 
will agree to it. If he doesnt and there is a Judge above us 
I hope he will meet out punishment to those what have de- 
served it by keeping us apart and treating her so shameful. 
Tell him that Joe. 

But why am I going on like this. We are just in love 
with everything at present and we both laugh a lot at having 
to sneak out and lie doggo all day. I took V out for a stroll 
at about eleven and we mooched round a bit and it was a 
lovely night. Although we dont talk to nobody but each other 
we aint lonely. You aint Joe when you love properly. 

Well Joe last night we skipped away about eleven and it 
was another lovely night so we walked to Liverpool Street. 
We caught a late trani. I didnt know where it was going 
but we hopped on without a ticket and went miles and miles 
into the country. And when it stopped at a place that looked 
nice we got out and I paid the fares from Liverpool Street. 
It was lovely. We got there about one in the morning and 
we walked a bit of a way till w^e come to a wood and then 
we laid down under a tree where it was all mossy and soft 
and we woke up about six when it was light and it looked 
just like Gods own country — all lovely. V did enjoy it. Well 
we just lazed about in them woods and played hide and seek 
and run races. Come on says V come and catch me. And 
off she went and she can run too. She did lead me a dance. 
And then she bolted into another wood. I was yards behind 
her and there I heard her voice saying I am lost come and 
find me. So I went after where the noise come from and 
then I heard it behind me — I am lost come and find me. And 
then I seemed to hear it everywhere but when I went there 
it come from somewhere else. And all of a sudden Joe I 
felt so lonely like in that wood because I couldnt see her 
nowhere but only heard her saying come and find me. And 
I didn't like it. And I got tired of the wood. So I called to 
her to come out and there she was right behind me. We 
didnt play that game no more. We was getting hungry. So 



THE NORTON FOLGATE AFFAIR 335 

we walked into a village and had a slap up time with eggs 
and tea and lettiss and radishes and things. There was a 
piano there and V sat down and played all the ragtimes for 
about an hour. She always was one for a bit of music as 
you know. The old girl who kept the place thought we was 
just a couple of London munition workers what had got a 
day off and she was so took with V she couldnt do enough 
for us. We had a fine wash and brush up there and wanted 
it. That is what troubles us most. We cant find no water 
in the warehouse. She said she could let us have rooms if 
we wanted to stay the night but me and V didnt want to be 
separated and we thought sleeping out nicer. So we slept 
out that night again but not in those woods because we found 
a nicer place just on the banks of a river. 

V is no end tickled by the way I talked to the old girl 
and the way I manage things and find out the cheap places. 
She said she never knew I had so much swank in me that is 
because I have always been a bit quiet and awkward with 
her like a chap is when he is really in love. 

We come back to the warehouse to-night. Everything 
looked alright. It didnt look as though anybody had spotted 
us. I wish there was some way of your dropping a note 
into the place so I can hear the news and know what is going 
on and whether there is any trouble about our going away. 
Joe that is quite right that about a friend in need being a 
friend indeed. You have always been the best pal a chap 
ever had and we have had some great times together aint we. 
You have been closer than a brother to me Joe. I will say 
that. You will easy know the place. Second to the right as 
you get through Columbia Market — a big empty place with 
a couple of pulley cranes outside and a notice to Let. Stick 
it under the door Joe but dont try to see us. We cant take 
no risks. 

Got your note old man. I guessed how it would be but 
it is a good thing they dont put two and two together. I 
hope the police didnt upset my landlady when they called 
round. She is a good old body. I suppose they think I have 
just bolted to avoid military service and dont guess we have 
gone together. I cant help laughing at that when I know 
how we was both looking forward to joining up when we was 
eighteen wasnt we. But that was before I met V. I am 
sorry her Dad has written to the papers about her disappear- 



336 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

ance. I showed V your note and she says she will never 
never go back to her Dad. Oh Joe if you had seen the 
bruises and weels on her dear body you would feel like I do 
like as if I could do a murder on the man what done it. Bad as 
things are when I see my little white darling all marked like 
that and think of the shame and torture that I have saved her 
from I am glad over again for taking her away. As long as 
we are not caught I dont care a dam whether the whole world 
knows we have gone together. I never did mind what people 
thought about me no more do you. We have always kept 
ourselves to ourselves havent we and V was always refined 
and didnt mix much with the other lot and took no notice what 
they said about her. She asks me to thank you for what 
you have done for us and for keeping our secret. You are 
the only man in the world beside ourselves that knows. V 
never told a soul — she hadnt got anybody she could trust 
like I can trust you old man. One thing troubles me. When 
V had read your letter and the bit about the cops being after 
me she looked rather funny. She seems to be happy enough 
and I think she is for God knows I would cut my throat if 
that would make things any nicer for her. But she has said 
once or twice that she has been a lot of trouble to me and 
to everybody else and she said it again this time and I dont 
like to hear her talk that way. Oh Joe — what a wonderful 
girl she is. Such character and principals she has got — I 
never met anyone like her for that among our set which is 
all the kind I know. If ever there was a real good girl it 
is her. And so lively and all — over what we have to put up 
with in this place. 

Oh Joe Joe. It has happened. I knew it would. I never 
dared think of it. I never said so to myself. I just knew it 
deep down like. You will say that sounds silly but it is a 
fact. I knew it all the time. And it has come. 

Joe I had been out to get something for supper and I 
come back with some hard-boiled eggs and some beer and 
a loaf of bread and some bananas and some saveloys what 
I had knocked off while the chap was arguing with someone. 
And I was looking forward to the feed we was going to have 
Joe — and oh Joe it is awful to write about. Me coming in 
with those things what I had had such fun in getting for her. 
And then Joe there she was lying on the bed of shavings all 
still. I knew before I looked at her. She was dead Joe and 
there was a bottle of something by her side. How she had 



THE NORTON FOLGATE AFFAIR 337 

got it I dont know because she never went into any shop 
without me. She must have brought it with her in case. 
But oh Joe she is dead now — my darling little V. Oh God 
I loved her Joe more than I thought one could and it is me 
what has killed her. I didnt ought to have interfered. I 
didnt ought to have taken her from her home but what could I 
do Joe when I loved her so and see her suffering like that. 
I never thought that being in love meant what it has to me. 
I never see none of these awful things coming Joe when I 
first knew her. She had left a letter for me for good-bye. 
This is what she says Joe my precious little girl : 

Sweet, 

I love you too much to see you in any more; trouble than you have 
already got into through loving me so. I will now say goodbye sweetheart 
for the last time and when you see Joe say Hullo for me and tell him I hope 
we will all meet again some day. You will let Dad know wont you sweet- 
heart. I thought after a while we might have gone back and got married 
when he had calmed down a bit but there seems no way out. 

Whv cant we do what we want to so long as we dont do nobody any harm. 
When I met vou dear I knew then that the world was good and all a lovely 
place. Whv did they bother us so. I wonder why we cant all be happy. I 
thought the world was so big and good but really it is like being in a cage. 
You cant do anything in the world unless somebody else lets you. I am 
myself and so are vou. Whv cant we be let alone. 

" Tell Joe that if he finds' a nice girl I hope he wins her and dont have 
nobody saving you shant and he will be happy as I know I would if T could 
live for always with you dear. 

Well Joe T want you to take this letter to the police and 
tell them to come here and they will find us because this is 
Goodbye for me too Joe. I cant help thinking as I write 
this and look at her lying there so still what she was saying 
in the woods. It seems I can hear her voice in this warehouse 
Joe saying I am lost come and find me. So I am going to 
her Joe. I got that little gun what we bousfht for a lark in 
Bethnal Green Road and I got two cartridges. Joe — dont 
vou foreet what I said in one of the other letters about our 
being side by side. You got to see it done Joe for the sake 
of your old dead pal. And now goodbye and all the best 
to you and the rest of the chaps at the works. It is all over. 
It had to end somehow I suppose and I knew this would be 
it and perhaps this way is just as well. There is a lot of 
misery in the world Toe that nobodv can help. My darling 
had a rough time all her life but she looks very quiet now 
like as though she had dropped off to sleep after being very 
tired. I hope you will have a better time when you meet 
your girl Joe. 



338 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

From the Local Press. 

When information was taken to Ephraim Carfax, who was 
found at the Wesleyan Chapel at Foljambe Street, that the 
dead body of his daughter, Violet Beatrice Carfax, had been 
found in a disused warehouse side by side with the dead 
body of a man who was being sought by the military, he 
made no comment beyond saying : " I thought she had gone 
with a man. This is a sad blow. What are they going to 
do with the bodies ? I suppose this will get into the papers." 
Mr. Carfax, who has an ironmongery business in Norton 
Folgate, is a well-known chapel worker, and is highly 
respected In the district. 

At the inquest on the bodies of Violet Beatrice Carfax, 15, 
and George Borrowdale, 18, verdicts of suicide while of 
unsound mind were returned in each case, a rider being added 
to the effect that the girl was clearly under the influence of 
the man at the time. Letters from the deceased were put in 
which seemed to call for no other verdict. The father of 
the girl, giving evidence, stated that she had disappeared on 
Wednesday the i8th. Regarding certain passages in the 
letters, he admitted having frequently whipped her In order 
to stop her from " going with boys," and to make her come in 
by nine o'clock. She was always in the streets. He was not 
aware that on several occasions when she had not come home 
until half-past ten, and had been punished, her factory was 
working overtime. He had not believed her when she pleaded 
this, as she was not always truthful. 

The jury expressed their sympathy with the father in his 
bereavement, who Is a prominent and highly-respected 
member of the Foljambe Street Wesleyan Chapel. 

The funeral of Violet 'Beatrice Carfax, who, together with' 
a man, committed suicide in a disused warehouse, took place 
to-day at Bethnal Green. Although the deceased had ex- 
pressed in their letters a wish that they might be burled 
together, the father of Carfax refused to permit this. The 
body of the man was Interred to-day at Islington. There 
were no mourners in either case, Mr. Carfax, who is well 
known locally as a Wesleyan worker, being confined to his 
home with a chill. 



Spiritualism and its New 
Revelations (ii 



By Bernard Sickert 

I WILL make one more extract from The New Revelation 
before turning to the doctrinal part of my theme, and I am 
glad to say that I am for once in cordial agreement with Sir 
Arthur. " The whole system of paying by results, which is 
practically the present system, since if a medium never gets 
results he would soon get no payments, is a vicious one/' 
When we turn to the greatest authorities on this subject, 
Myers and Gurney, in the " Phantasms of the Living," pur- 
sued their investigations "through private sources, and free 
at any rate from the specific suspicion to which the presence 
of a ' paid medium ' must inevitably give rise." And now, 
years after this exemplary procedure, we find seekers not 
merely consulting paid mediums, but paying by results ! If 
I turn now to Sir Oliver Lodge's Raymond, or Life and 
Death, it is not with a view to going all over that ground 
again, which has been amply covered by previous reviewers, 
but in order to emphasise the fact that he, like other 
spiritualists, is reluctant to admit that telepathy, as estab- 
lished chiefly by Myers, is sufficient to account for the bulk 
of the phenomena enumerated by him. Andrew Lang, and, 
I believe, Podmore, showed that when once it had been 
established that telepathic communication is possible, not 
merely experimentally — i.e., between two persons who de- 
liberately try to get en rap-port — but unconsciously between 
an agent at some acute crisis and a sympathetic, but not pre- 
pared, recipient, there is nothing inherently incredible in the 
supposition that such a message might be switched on to a 
second, a third, a fourth recipient. This may, for instance, 
account for the " group photograph," since there were twenty- 
one officers in that group. 

As for the rest of the book, in so far as it is a record and 
not an exposition or an expression of opinion, there is little 
material to criticise. Message follows message, and although 
most of them were presumably beyond the knowledge of the 
medium engaged, only one was outside the conscious know- 
ledge of some member of the family. 



340 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

Most of the tests are interesting as examples of telepathy ; 
names of houses, such as Grove Park and Newcastle, the 
nickname of "Pat," allusions to "Argonaut" and "Dart- 
moor," and " Honolulu." The last is a very successful in- 
stance of telepathy. Three of the family at a sitting at 
Edgbaston think of the verse introduced formerly by ^Ray- 
mond into an old song with an allusion to "Honolulu," and 
two others at a simultaneous sitting with Mrs. Leonard in 
London receive a message, "Play Honolulu," introduced 
without preamble. But, remarkable as this cross-corre- 
spondence is, it is nothing to the truly amazing volte face 
which is performed by Sir Oliver Lodge in his comment 
thereon. " What it does not exclude is telepathy. Telepathy, 
however — of whatever kind — is not a normal explanation ; and 
I venture to say that there is no normal explanation, since, in 
my judgment, chance is out of the question." 

Here, in one sentence, casually introduced, the whole pur- 
port of this book, the proof of communications from spirits 
of the departed, is abandoned, and we are invited to fall back 
on telepathy, which is not in dispute and which I may say is, 
partlv through the work of Gurney and Myers as pioneers, 
so little disputed that we may now fairly call it a normal 
though not a frequent occurrence. Nothing but impatient 
ignorance could attribute the Honolulu message to chance. 

But, returning to the messages, what must strike one 
chiefly besides their purport is their form, regarding them as 
messages from the dead. For what reason are they invariably 
introduced in some cryptic form, as a kind of puzzle, or 
cryptogram, allusively, by initials; gradually, by stages; in- 
correctly, by blunders ? Example : " Do you know F. W. M. ? 
I see those three letters; do you know S. T.? Yes; I get 
S. T., then a dot, and then P. These are shown to me. I 
see them in light." (Allusion to F. W. Myers and his poem 
St. Paul) All the messages have this character, appearing to 
make the proceedings of the nature of a silly and frivolous 
game, inappropriate to the occasion. 

We must inquire, then, what is their aim? Obviously, 
first to establish the reliability of the medium, for if your 
channel is tainted it is useless to hope for a pure stream. 
The first message, and the first message only, should be of 
such a kind that the medium does not and cannot understand 
it, but the recipients do. Such a message as the " Argonaut " 
or " Grove Park " or " Land yacht " items would have served 
the purpose, which is merely to establish the bona fides of the 



SPIRITUALISM 341 

medium. The second point to be established through the 
second message is its authenticity — that is to say, the assur- 
ance that it has not arisen from the recipients themselves, 
consciously or unconsciously. In form the " Mitchell " mes- 
sage is perfect of its kind, but the name is hardly more evi- 
dential than the name of Smith. Here we find, early in the 
book, an example of what one must call the singular incom- 
petence of the spirit throughout, as of all spirits I have read 
about. There was ready to his hand, at that very instant, 
a name so singular that it caught my eye at once when I 
casually ran my eye down the casualty list, which I very 
seldom do, the name of a man who would have given no 
dubious answer — Captain Boast. If the table had rapped 
out B.O.A. S. T., conviction would have been carried to 
many, perhaps most, minds of men who can regard these phe- 
nomena in a cool, dispassionate light. 

Now as to the triviality of the messages. No one can 
reasonably quarrel with the first messages on that score. 
Nothing should be considered trivial if it is only crucial, and 
details are apt to be trivial. But a little research would 
suffice anyone to refer to some fact known only to the agent. 
If I wanted to send a telepathic message, as a test, I should 
send as follows : " In the left-hand top drawer of my chest 
you will find a little oval nickel charm which I picked up on 
the grounds here. On one side is a relief of Jesus Christ, 
on the other the figure of the Madonna and Child." . . . No 
one of my friends and acquaintances could possibly by any 
coincidence guess this fact, and such a message therefore 
could only come from me. It would be crucial and final. Not 
once does Raymond, or any other spirit, send a message of 
that stamp. 

Whilst we should expect, and indeed demand, that the 
first messages should be of the nature I have indicated, when 
you have tested your wire once, found it in working order, it 
is superfluous to continue testing. And yet Raymond goes 
on and on interminably with test after test. It is as if corre- 
spondents at the telephone were to do nothing but ring the 
telephone bell. If that is not the point of the following 
messages, which form the bulk of the book, what is their 
point? No doubt these family reminiscences have a point 
and an interest for the family, and the sacrifice of decency 
would be amply justified if they were evidentially convinc- 
ing. But the accumulation of trivial incidents, none of which 
are really convincing, is to be deplored. Still more lament- 



342 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

able are the excursions which we are invited to attend into 
regions which are held to be so sacred that even an atheist 
with any spark of reverence must deprecate them. 

Physical Phenomena. 

By " physical phenomena " we must understand the direct 
action of mind on matter without the intervention of brain, 
nerve, or muscle. Under this head we would include levita- 
tions, or the raising of any body, human or other, into the 
air; rappings on a table or other inanimate object; the crea- 
tion of matter ; the annihilation of matter ; spirit photographs ; 
the handling of fire, etc., etc. 

Sir Arthur is a whole-hearted believer in these pheno- 
mena; he quotes from Wallace without misgiving the asser- 
tion that D. Home (the nephew of the Earl of Home) floated 
out of one window and into another at a height of seventy 
feet above the ground. The following, experienced by 
Wallace himself, can therefore present no difficulties to him. 
They are certainly, as he describes them, " both numerous 
and varied " : A guitar which behaved as if alive ; a chair 
which moved away just as a relation of Mr. R. was going to 
sit on it; a table which rose vertically from six inches to a 
foot; the levitation of Mrs. Guppy, who was found to be 
quietly seated in her chair on the centre of the table, her 
head just touching the chandelier; the creation of flowers, 
consisting of anemones, tulips, chrysanthemums, Chinese 
primroses, etc., by, or at least through, the mediumship of 
the same Mrs. Guppy; the production of spirit photographs 
on three occasions, in each of which a spirit form appeared 
in the negative. The first was that of a male figure with a 
short sword. 

But these phenomena, remarkable as they are, pale when 
compared with others referred to by Wallace as fully 
established : — 

In 1870 Daniel Home placed a lump of burning coal 
on Mr. C. S. Hall's head. " Mr. Home smiled, and seemed 
quite pleased, and then proceeded to draw up Mr. Hall's 
white hair over the red coal." Sir William Crookes "was 
allowed to go into the dark room accompanied by the spirit, 
and there both saw and felt Miss Cook (the medium), dressed 
in black velvet, lying in a trance on the floor, while the spirit 
form in white robes stood close beside her, and, by permission, 
clasped the figure (of the spirit this time), and found it to be 
apparently that of a real living woman." — The tangible, 



SPIRITUALISM 343 

visible, and audible figure of Mr. Livermore's deceased wife, 
sometimes accompanied by a male figure, purporting to be 
Dr. Franklin. — The late Mrs. Livermore allowed a portion of 
her dress to be cut off, which in a short time melted away and 
became invisible. 

The comments which naturally arise in our minds on these 
events are both " numerous and varied." As to Mrs. Guppy 
and her powers of creation and levitation, we are tempted 
to exclaim in her own words, "Why don't you get out?" 
The triumphant declaration that in the case of the flowers 
" covered with dew" — " Delusion it cannot be, for the flowers 
are real and can be preserved," is paralleled by the experi- 
ence of Mrs. Howitt, who "planted a sprig of geranium 
handed by an invisible hand, and it is now growing." Thus 
argued honest Smith concerning Jack Cade : " He made a 
chimney in my father's house, and the bricks are alive to 
this day to testify it." As for the "male figure with a short 
sword " who disappears as abruptly as he appears, que diable 
allait-il faire dans cette gaUre? — unless we may conjecture 
that he was an ancestor, William Wallace, let us say. 

Regarding these physical phenomena, Sir Oliver's atti- 
tude is far from satisfactory. He shows caution, and in that 
respect differs widely from Conan Doyle, but caution is not 
quite the same thing as evasion. In Raymond he excuses 
himself from entering into a discussion, because the pheno- 
mena did enter into the purview of that book. He says 
expressly : " I am not in this book describing any cases of 
that sort." Yet the behaviour of the table on some occasions 
is thus described : " The table now seemed to wish to get 
into Lady Lodge's lap, and made most caressing movements 
to and fro." " It then laid itself down on the ground." " It 
lifted itself quite a foot from the ground." " It found a corner 
of the skirting-board, where it could lodge one foot about six 
inches from the ground ; it then raised the other three level 
with it in the air; and this it did many times, seeming 
delighted with its new trick." 

Now for the exposition. "A table sitting seems to be 
less interfered with by the mental activity of an intervening 
medium, and to be rather more direct. The tilting of the 
table need not be regarded as a ' physical phenomenon ' in 
the technical and supernormal sense, yet it does not appear 
to be done by the muscles of those present. We may assume 
that the table or other piece of furniture is tilted or moved 
by regular muscular force ; certainly it can only move at the 



344 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

expense oi the energy of the medium or of people present. 
The effort required to tilt the table is slight, and evidentially 
it must no doubt be assumed that, so far as mechanical force 
is concerned, it is exerted by muscular action. But my im- 
pression is that the tilting is an incipient physical pheno- 
menon, and that though the energy, of course, comes from 
the people present, it does not appear to be applied in quite 
a normal way. Inert matter appears to be operated on with- 
out the direct intervention of physiological mechanism. Yet 
such mechanism must be in the neighbourhood. A table (I 
must testify) can exhibit hesitation, it can exhibit certainty, 
it can seek for information, it can convey it, it can indicate joy 
or sorrow, fun or gravity. Most notable of all, it can exhibit 
affection in an unmistakable manner." 

The whole of this exposition is far from clear, and it is 
unclear because it is shifty. At one time we are given to 
understand that the table only moves when touched; he 
speaks of " those whose hands lie flat on the top of the table," 
which is precise enough; at another time, that physical 
mechanism need be only "in the neighbourhood." He also 
says : " I must add that the movements were not physically 
impossible from those whose hands were only on the table- 
top," but " no conscious effort was employed by anyone 
present." This means, if it means anything, that deliberately 
conscious exertion on the part of persons holding their hands 
fiat on a table could make it lodge one foot on the skirting- 
board and raise the other three in the air, or try to get into 
a lady's lap, or lay itself down on the ground, I simply 
deny this. Talk of " incipient " physical phenomena ! Why, 
these are physical phenomena in full blast; there is nothing 
incipient about them. It is only fair to say that these little 
games did not occur when Sir Oliver himself was present, but 
they are recorded by him, and should therefore not conflict 
with his exposition. It is difficult to make head or tail of the 
emotions which he affirms a table is capable of exhibiting — 
the joy, sorrow, fun, gravity, affection, etc. This should mean 
that the emotions thus interpreted by him from the sounds 
and movements issuing from the table would be so interpreted 
by anyone taking part in the sitting — by me, for instance, 
which I am quite justified in denying. The sitters evidently 
get so exalted that they fail at last to distinguish between 
the spirit and the table, as when Miss Wood writes : " He 
was so pleased, and showed it so vigorously, that he, and we, 
all laughed together." The " he " referring not, as one might 



SPIRITUALISM 345 

suppose, to the table, but to the spirit. She does not say 
the table laughed, though, indeed, if a table could express 
all the other emotions so unmistakably, I don't see what is 
to prevent its laughing. 

It is true, however, that these physical phenomena, 
whether "incipient" or not, take but a small space within the 
pages of this particular book Rayjnond, but if we turn for 
enlightenment «to an earlier work, The Survival of Man, we 
find the same evasiveness. In an early Presidential Address 
Professor Sidgwick said : " It is a scandal that a dispute as 
to the reality of these phenomena should still be going on." 
Now the S.P.R. was started in 1882 for the express purpose 
of investigating these phenomena, and if it was a scandal 
then, what are we say of it now, in 1918? In The Stirvivai 
of Man (p. 21) we find : " There is the question of so-called 
spirit-photography ; there are asserted levitations and apports 
and physical movements, none of which have been subjected 
to adequate scientific examination." What a remarkable con- 
fession ! These physical phenomena first came into notice 
(through Kate Fox in 1848; so we have a period of sixty 
years, which is still to be considered not long enough for their 
establishment or confutation. Sir Oliver Lodge says : " Until 
these things have been submitted to long-continued scientific 
scrutiny they will make no undisputed impression. They 
will be either improperly accepted or improperly rejected." 
How long after the announcement of the discoveries of M. 
and Mme. Curie did it take for them to be accepted by the 
scientific world } Not sixty years. The attitude of the " open 
mind " can be pushed to extremes which render it far from 
scientific. We materialists are always being challenged to 
account for this and account for that. But we do not feel 
called upon to account for phenomena until at least they are 
established to the satisfaction of those who put them forward. 
We are not going to waste time discussing 

"Why the sea is boiling hot, 
And whether pigs have wings." 

That remarkable masterpiece of Morley Roberts, Thne and 
Thomas Waring, contains a humorous but very just criticism 
on the agnostic attitude. The agnostics say : " I have not 
seen my way hitherto to decide one way or the other whether 
there is or is not a Bengal tiger on the roof." Would it not 
be more honest, says Waring, to answer : " There is no Bengal 
tiger on the roof " ? 

p 



Dusky Ruth 

By A. E. Coppard 

At the close of an April day, chilly and wet, the traveller 
came to a country town. In the Cotswolds, though the towns 
are small and sweet and the inns snug, the general habit of 
the land is bleak and bare. He had newly come upon upland 
roads so void of human affairs, so lonely, that they might have 
been made for some forgotten uses by departed men, and left 
to the unwitting passage of such strangers as himself. Even 
the unending walls, built of old rough laminated rock, that 
detailed the far-spreading fields, had grown very old again 
in their courses ; there were dabs of darkness, buttons of moss, 
and fossils on every stone. He had passed a few neighbour- 
hoods, sometimes at the crook of a stream, or at the cross of 
debouching roads, where old habitations, their gangrenated 
thatch riddled with bird holes, had been not so much erected 
as just spattered about the places. Beyond these signs an 
odd lark or blackbird, the ruckle of partridges, or the nifty 
gallop of a hare had been the only mitigation of the living 
loneliness that was almost as profound by day as by night. 
But the traveller had a care for such times and places. There 
are men who love to gaze with the mind at things that can 
never be seen, feel at least the throb of a beauty that will 
never be known, and hear over immense bleak reaches the 
echo of that which is no celestial music, but only their own 
hearts' vain cries; and though his garments clung to him like 
clay it was with deliberate questing step that the traveller 
trod the single street of the town, and at last entered the inn, 
shuffling his shoes in the doorway for a moment and striking 
the raindrops from his hat. Then he turned into a small 
smoking-room. Leather-lined benches, much worn, were fixed 
to the wall under the window and in other odd corners and 
nooks behind mahogany tables. One wall was furnished with 
all the congenial gear of a bar, but without any intervening 
counter. Opposite a bright fire was burning, and. a neatly- 
dressed young woman sat before it in a Windsor chair, staring 
at the flames. There was no other inmate of the room, and 
as he entered the girl rose up and greeted him. He found 



DUSKY RUTH 347 

that he could be accommodated for the night, and in a few 
moments his hat and scarf were removed and placed inside 
the fender, his wet overcoat was taken to the kitchen, the land- 
lord, an old fellow, was lending him a roomy pair of slippers, 
and a maid was setting supper in an adjoining room. 

He sat while this was doing and talked to the barmaid. 
She had a beautiful, but rather mournful, face as it was lit 
by the firelight, and when her glance was turned away from 
it her eyes had a piercing brightness. Friendly and well 
spoken as she was, the melancholy in her aspect was notice- 
able^^ — perhaps it was the dim room, or the wet day, or the 
long hours ministering a multitude of cocktails to thirsty 
gallantry. 

When he went to his supper he found cheering food and 
drink, with pleasant garniture of silver and mahogany. There 
were no other visitors, he was to be alone; blinds were drawn, 
lamps lit, and the fire at his back was comforting. So he 
sat long about his meal until a white-faced maid came to clear 
the table, discoursing to him about country things as she 
busied about the room. It was a long, narrow room, with a 
sideboard and the door at one end and the fireplace at the 
other. A bookshelf, almost devoid of books, contained a 
number of plates ; the long wall that faced the windows was 
almost destitute of pictures, but there were hung upon it, for 
some inscrutable but doubtless sufficient reason, many dish- 
covers, solidly shaped, of the kind held in such mysterious 
regard and known as " willow pattern " ; one was even hung 
upon the face of a map. Two musty prints were mixed with 
them, presentiments of horses having a stilted, extravagant 
physique, and bestridden by images of inhuman and incom- 
municable dignity, clothed in whiskers, coloured jackets, and 
tight, white breeches. 

He took down the books from the shelf, but his interest 
was speedily exhausted, and the almanacs, the county direc- 
tory, and various guide-books were exchanged for the Cois- 
wold Chronicle. With this, having drawn the deep chair to 
the hearth, he whiled away the time. The newspaper amused 
him with the advertisements of stock shows, farm auctions, 
travelling quacks and conjurers, and there was a lengthy 
account of the execution of a local felon, one Timothy 
Bridger, who had murdered an infant in some shameful cir- 
cumstances. This dazzling crescendo proved rather trying to 
the traveller; he threw down the paper. The town was all 
quiet as the hills, and he could hear no sounds in the house. 

p 2 



348 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

He got up and went across the hall to the smoke-room. The 
door was shut, but there was light within, and he entered. 
The girl sat there much as he had seen her on his arrival, 
still alone, with feet on fender. He shut the door behind him, 
sat down, and crossing his legs puffed at his pipe, admired the 
snug little room and the pretty figure of the girl, which he could 
do without embarrassment, as her meditative head, slightly 
bowed, was turned away from him. He could see something 
of her, too, in the mirror at the bar, which repeated also the 
agreeable contours of bottles of coloured wines and rich 
liqueurs — so entrancing in form and aspect that they seemed 
destined to charming histories, even in disuse — and those of 
familiar outline containing mere spirits or small beer, for 
which are reserved the harsher destinies of base oils, horse 
medicines, disinfectants, and cold tea. There were coloured 
glasses for bitter wines, white glasses for sweet, a tiny leaden 
sink beneath them, and the four black handles of the beer 
engine. 

The girl wore a light blouse of silk, a short skirt of black 
velvet, and a pair of very thin silk stockings that showed the 
flesh of instep and shin so plainly that he could see they were 
reddened by the warmth of the fire. She had on a pair of 
dainty cloth shoes with high heels, but what was wonderful 
about her was the heap of rich black hair piled at the back of 
her head and shadowing the dusky neck. He sat puffing his 
pipe and letting the loud tick of the clock fill the quiet room. 
She did not stir and he could move no muscle. It was as if he 
had been willed to come there and wait silently. That, he felt 
now, had been his desire all the evening; and here, in her 
presence, he was more strangely stirred in a few short minutes 
than at any event he could remember. 

In youth he had viewed women as futile, pitiable things 
that grew long hair, wore stays and garters, and prayed in- 
comprehensible prayers. Viewing them in the stalls of the 
theatre from his vantage-point in the gallery, he always dis- 
liked the articulation of their naked shoulders. But still, 
there was a god in the sky, a god with flowing hair and ex- 
quisite eyes, whose one stride with an ardour grandly rendered 
took him across the whole round hemisphere to which his 
buoyant limbs were bound like spokes to the eternal rim and 
axle, his bright hair burning in the pity of the sunsets and 
tossing in the anger of the dawns. 

Master traveller had indeed come into this room to be 
with this woman, and she as surely desired him, and for all its 



DUSKY RUTH 349 

accidental occasion it was as if he, walking the ways of the 
world, had suddenly come upon what, what so imaginable with 
all permitted reverence as, well, just a shrine; and he, admir- 
ably humble, bowed the instant head. 

Were there no other people within ? The clock indicated 
a few minutes to nine. He sat on, still as stone, and the 
woman miofht have been of wax for all the movement or sound 
she made. There was allurement in the air between them; 
he had forborne his smoking, the pipe grew cold between his 
teeth. He waited for a look from her, a movement to break 
the trance of silence. No footfall in street or house, no voice 
in the inn but the clock, beating away as if pronouncing a 
doom. Suddenly it rasped out nine large notes, a bell in the 
town repeated them dolefully, and a cuckoo no further than 
the kitchen mocked them wath three times three. After that 
came the weak steps of the old landlord along the hall, the 
slam of doors, the clatter of lock and bolt, and then the silence 
returning unendurably upon them. 

He arose and stood behind her; he touched the black hair. 
She made no movement or sign. He pulled out two or three 
combs, and dropping them into her lap let the whole mass 
tumble about his hands. It had a curious harsh touch in the 
unravelling, but was so full and shining; black as a rook's 
wings it was. He slid his palms through it. His fingers 
searched it and fought with its fine strangeness ; into his mind 
there travelled a serious thought, stilling his wayward fancy — 
this was no wayward fancy, but a rite accomplishing itself ! 
{Run, run, silly man, y'are lost!) But having got so far he 
burnt his boats, leaned over, and drew her face back to him. 
And at that, seizing his wrists, she gave him back ardour for 
ardour, pressing his hands to her bosom, while the kiss was 
sealed again and again. Then she sprang up and picking 
his scarf and hat from the fender said : 

" I have been drying them for you, but the hat has shrunk 
a bit, Fm sure — I tried it on." 

He took them from her and put them behind him; he 
leaned lightly back upon the table, holding it with both his 
hands behind him ; he could not speak. 

" Aren't you going to thank me for drying them?" she 
asked, picking her combs from the rug and repinning her hair. 

" I wonder why we did that? " he asked, shamedly. 

" It is what I'm thinking too," she said. 

" You were so beautiful about . . . about it, you know." 

She made no rejoinder, but continued to bind her hair, 



350 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

looking brightly at him under her brows. When she had 
finished she went close to him. 

"Will that do?" 

" I'll take it down again." 

" No, no, the old man or the old woman will be coming 
in." 

"What of that?" he said, taking her into his arms, "tell 
me your name." 

She shook her head, but she returned his kisses and 
stroked his hair and shoulders with beautifully melting 
gestures. 

"What is your name, I want to call you by your name? " 
he said ; " I can't keep calling you Lovely Woman, Lovely 
Woman." 

Again she shook her head and was dumb. 

" I'll call you Ruth then, Dusky Ruth, Ruth of the black, 
beautiful hair." 

" That is a nice-sounding name — I knew a deaf and dumb 
girl named Ruth; she went to Nottingham and married. an 
organ grinder — but I should like it for my name." 

" Then I give it to you." 

" Mine is so ugly." 

"What is it?" 

Again the shaken head and the burning caress. 

" Then you shall be Ruth ; will you keep that name ? " 

" Yes, if you give me the name I will keep it for you." 

Time had indeed taken them by the forelock, and they 
looked up a ruddled world. 

" I stake my one talent," he said jestingly," and behold it 
returns me fortyfold; I feel like the boy who catches three 
mice with one piece of cheese." 

At ten o'clock the girl said : 

" I must go and see how //^^"v are getting on," and she went 
to the door. 

" Are we keeping them up ? " 

She nodded. " Are you tired?" 

" No, I am not tired." 

She looked at him doubtfully. 

" We ought not to stay in nere ; go into the coffee room 
and I'll come there in a few minutes." 

" Right," he whispered gaily, " we'll sit up all night." 

She stood at the door for him to pass out, and he crossed 
the hall to the other room. It was in darkness except for the 
flash of the fire. Standing at the hearth he lit a match for 



DUSKY RUTH 35^ 

the lamp, but paused at the globe; then he extinguished the 
match. 

" No it's better to sit in the firelight." 

He heard voices at the other end of the house that seemed 
to have a chiding note in them. 

" Lord," he thought, " is she getting into a row.^ " 

Then her steps came echoing over the stone floors of the 
hall ; she opened the door and stood there with a lighted 
candle in her hand; he stood at the other end of the room, 
smiling. 

" Good night," she said. 

" Oh no, no ! come along," he protested, but not moving 
from the hearth. 

" Got to go to bed," she answered. 

" Are they angry with you ? " 

" No." 

" Well, then, come over here and sit down." 

" Got to go to bed," she said again, but she had meanwhile 
put her candlestick upon the little sideboard and was trim- 
ming the wick with a burnt match. 

" Oh, come along, just half an hour," he protested. She 
did not answer but went on prodding the wick of the candle. 

" Ten minutes, then," he said, still not going towards her. 

" Five minutes," he begged. 

She shook her head, and picking up the candlestick turned 
to the door. He did not move, he just called her name : 
" Ruth ! " 

She came back then, put down the candlestick and tiptoed 
across the room until he met her. The bliss of the embrace 
was so poignant that he was almost glad when she stood up 
again and said with affected steadiness, though he heard the 
tremor in her voice : 

" I must get you your candle." 

She brought one from' the hall, set it on the table in front 
of him, and struck the match. 

" What is my number? " he asked. 

" Number six room," she answered, prodding the wlclc 
vaguely with her match, while a slip of white wax dropped 
over the shoulder of the new candle. " Number six . . . next 
to mine." 

The match burnt out ; she said abruptly " Good-night." 
took up her own candle and left him there. 

In a few moments he ascended the stairs and went into his 
room. He fastened the door, removed his coat, collar, and 



352 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

slippers, but the rack of passion had seized him and he moved 
about with no inclination to sleep. He sat down, but there 
was no medium of distraction. He tried to read the news- 
paper which he had carried up with him, and without realising 
a single phrase he forced himself to read again the whole 
account of the execution of the miscreant Bridger. When 
he had finished this he carefully folded the paper, and stood 
up, listening. He went to the parting wall and tapped 
thereon with his finger tips. He waited half a minute, one 
minute, two minutes; there was no answering sign. He 
tapped again, more loudly, with his knuckles, but there was no 
response, and he tapped many times. He opened his door as 
noiselessly as possible; along the dark passage there were 
slips of light under the other doors, the one next his own, and 
the one beyond that. He stood in the corridor listening to 
the rumble of old voices in the farther room, the old man 
and his wife going to their rest. Holding hrs breath fear- 
fully he stepped to her door and tapped gently upon it. 
There was no answer, but he could somehow divine her aware- 
ness of him; he tapped again; she moved to the door and 
whispered " No, no, go away." He turned the handle, the 
door was locked. 

" Let me in," he pleaded. He knew she was standing 
there an inch or two beyond him. 

" Hush," she called softly. " Go away, the old woman 
has ears like a fox." 

He stood silent for a moment. 

Unlock it," he urged ; but he got no further reply, and 
feeling foolish and baffled he moved back to his own room, 
cast his clothes from him, doused the candle and crept into the 
bed with soul wild as a storm-swept forest, his heart beating a 
vagrant summons. The room filled with strange heat, there 
was no composure for mind or limb, nothing but flaming 
visions and furious embraces. 

Morality . . . what is it but agreement with your own 
soul?" 

So he lay for two hours — the clocks chimed twelve^ — 
listening with foolish persistency for her step along the cor- 
ridor, fancying every light sound — and the night was full of 
them — was her hand upon the door. 

Suddenly, then — and it seemed as if his very heart would 
abash the house with its thunder — he could hear distinctly 
someone knocking on the wall. He got quickly from his bed 
and stood at his door, listening. Again the knocking was 



DUSKY RUTH 353 

heard, and having half-clothed himself he crept into the pas- 
sage, which was now in utter darkness, trailing his hand along 
the wall until he felt her door; it was standing open. He 
entered her room and closed the door behind him. There 
was not the faintest gleam of light, he could see nothing. He 
whispered " Ruth !" and she was standing there. She touched 
him, but not speaking. He put out his hands, and they met 
round her neck ; her hair was flowing in its great wave about 
her ; he put his lips to her face and found that her eyes were 
streaming with tears, salt and strange and disturbing. In the 
close darkness he put his arms about her with no thought but 
to comfort her; one hand had plunged through the long harsh 
tresses and the other across her hips before he realised that 
she was ungowned ; then he was aware of the softness of her 
breasts and the cold naked sleekness of her shoulders. But 
she was crying there, crying silently with great tears, her 
strange sorrow stifling his desire. 

" Ruth, Ruth, my beautiful dear ! " he murmured sooth- 
ingly. He felt for the bed with one hand, and turning back 
the quilt and sheets he lifted her in as easily as a mother does 
her child, replaced the bedding, and, in his clothes, he lay 
stretched beside her comforting her. They lay so, innocent 
as children, for an hour, when she seemed to have gone to 
sleep. He rose then and went silently to his room, full of 
weariness. 

In the morning he breakfasted without seeing her, but as 
he had business in the world that gave him just an hour longer 
at the Inn before he left it for good and all, he went into the 
smoke room and found her. She greeted him with curious 
gaze, but merrily enough, for there were other men there now, 
farmers, a butcher, a registrar, an old, old man. The hour 
passed, but not these men, and at length he donned his coat, 
took up his stick, and said good-bye. Her shining glances 
followed him to the door, and from the window as far as they 
could view him. 



The Generous Gambler 

{.From the French of Charles Baudelaire) 

Translated by Arthur Symons 

Yesterday, across the crowd of the boulevard, I found my- 
self touched by a mysterious Being I had always desired to 
know, and who I recognised immediately, in spite of the fact 
that I had never seen him. He had, I imagined, in himself, 
relatively as to me, a similar desire, for he gave mxC, in pass- 
ing, so significant a sign in his eyes that I hastened to obey 
him. I followed him attentively, and soon I descended 
behind him into a subterranean dwelling, astonishing to me 
as a vision, where shone a luxury of which none of the actual 
houses in Paris could give me an approximate example. It 
seemed to me singular that I had passed so often that pro- 
digious retreat without having discovered the entrance. 
There reigned an exquisite, an almost stifling atmosphere, 
which made one forget almost instantaneously all the fas- 
tidious horrors of life ; there I breathed a sombre sensuality, 
like that of opium-smokers when, set on the shore of an 
enchanted island, over which shone an eternal afternoon, they 
felt bom in them, to the soothing sounds of melodious cas- 
cades, the desire of never again seeing their households, their 
women, their children, and of never again being tossed on 
the decks of ships by storms. 

There were there strange faces of men and women, gifted 
with so fatal a beauty that I seemed to have seen them years 
ago and in countries which I failed to remember, and which in- 
spired in me that curious sympathy and that equally curious 
sense of fear that I usually discover in unknown aspects. If 
I wanted to define in some fashion or other the singular ex- 
pression of their eyes, I would say that never had I seen 
such magic radiance more energetically expressing the horror 
of ennui and of desire — of the immortal desire of feeling 
themselves alive. 

As for mine host and myself, we were already, as we sat 
down, as perfect friends as if we had always known each 
other. We drank immeasurably of all sorts of extraordinary 



THE GENEROUS GAMBLER 355 

wines, and — a thing not less bizarre — it seemed to me, after 
several hours, that I was no more intoxicated than he was. 

However, gambling, this superhuman pleasure, had cut, 
at various intervals, our copious libations, and I ought to say 
that I had gained and lost my soul, as we were playing, with 
an heroical carelessness and light-heartedness. The soul is 
so invisible a thing, often useless and sometimes so trouble- 
some, that I did not experience, as to this loss, more than 
that kind of emotion I might have had had I lost my visiting- 
card in the street. 

We spent hours in smoking cigars, whose incomparable 
savour and perfume give to the soul the nostalgia of unknown 
delights and sights, and, intoxicated by all these spiced sauces, 
I dared, in an access of familiarity which did not seem to 
displease him, to cry, as I lifted a glass filled to the brim with 
wine : " To your immortal health. Old He-Goat ! " 

We talked of the universe, of its creation and of its future 
destruction ; of the leading ideas of the century — that is to say, 
of Progress and Perfectibility — and, in general, of all kinds 
of human infatuations. On this subject his Highness was 
inexhaustible in his irrefutable jests, and he expressed himself 
with a splendour of diction and with a magnificence in drol- 
lery such as I have never found in any of the most famous 
conversationalists of our age. He explained to me the ab- 
surdity of different philosophies that had so far taken posses- 
sion of men's brains, and deigned even to take me in con- 
fidence in regard to certain fundamental principles, which I 
am not inclined to share with anyone. 

He complained in no way of the evil reputation under 
which he lived, indeed, all over the world, and he assured me 
that he himself was of all living beings the most interested 
in the destruction of Sziferstition, and he avowed to me that he 
had been afraid, relatively as to his proper power, once only, 
and that was on the day when he had heard a preacher, more 
subtle than the rest of the human herd, cry in his pulpit : 
" My dear brethren, do not ever forget, when your hear the 
progress of lights praised, that the loveliest trick of the Devil 
is to persuade you that they don't exist ! " 

The memory of this famous orator brought us naturally 
on the subject of Academies, and my strange host declared 
to me that he didn't disdain, in many cases, to inspire the pens, 
the words, and the consciences of pedagogues, and that he 
almost always assisted in person, in spite of being invisible, 
at all the scientific meetings. 



356 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

Encouraged by so much kindness I asked him if he had 
any news of God — who has not his hours of impiety ? — especi- 
ally as the old friend of the Devil. He said to me, with a 
shade of unconcern united with a deeper shade of sadness : 
" We salute each other when we meet." But, for the rest, he 
spoke in Hebrew. 

It is uncertain if his Highness has ever given so long an 
audience to a simple mortal, and I feared to abuse it. 

Finally, as the dark approached shivering, this famous 
personage, sung by so many poets, and served by so many 
philosophers who work for his glory's sake without being 
aware of it, said to me : " I want you to remember me always, 

and to prove to you that I of whom one says so much evil 

— am often enough bon diable, to make use of one of your 
vulgar locutions. So as to make up for the irremediable loss that 
you have made of your soul, I shall give you back the stake 
you ought to have gained, if your fate had been fortunate — 
that is to say, the possibility of solacing and of conquering, 
during your whole life, this bizarre affection of enmii, which 
is the source of all your maladies and of all your miseries. 
Never a desire shall be formed by you that I will not aid 
you to realise; you will reign over your vulgar equals; money 
and gold and diamonds, fairy palaces, shall come to seek you 
and shall ask you to accept them without your having made 
the least effort to obtain them; you can change your abode 
as often as you like; you shall have in your power all sen- 
sualities without lassitude, in lands where the climate is 
always hot, and where the women are as scented as the 
flowers." With this he rose up and said goodbye to me with 
a charming smile. 

If it had not been for the shame of humiliating myself 
before so immense an assembly, I might have voluntarily 
fallen at the feet of this generous Gambler, to thank him 
for his unheard-of munificence. But, little by little, after 
I had left him, an incurable defiance entered into me; I dared 
no longer believe in so prodigious a happiness ; and as I went 
to bed, making over again my nightly prayer by means of all 
that remained in me in the matter of faith, I repeated in my 
slumber: "My God, my Lord, my God! Do let the Devil 
keep his word with me ! " 



Swank (i) 

By T. Dove Keighley 



I HELD out for years, but I had to give in. Slang was my 
abomination. When a man said " bike " I was inclined to 
hit him; if a woman said it I shuddered and guessed at her 
age. Now I am older and wiser. It is no use ; unless we are 
content to be hopelessly outdistanced, we offspring of the 
nineteenth century must adopt the thoughts of its successor. 
" To be up to date " is my matured intention. Because human 
nature finds that it is easier to follow the line of least resist- 
ance I have made a study of " Swank " and here and now 
accept the inevitable. 

The real reason why swank is delightful is that it is the 
common possession of our poor humanity. Every boy is a 
born swanker. In the same way, every girl is a born matron. 
Swank means putting the goods in the shop-window to the 
best effect; or, if our goods are purely physical possessions, 
parading at our best. But the " goods " must be good. Has 
not that great man, Abraham Lincoln, said : " You may fool 
sorhe of the people some of the time and some of the people 
all the time, but you can't fool all the people all the time "? 
Correct knowledge should be the compensation that age 
enjoys over the delightful audacity that renders youthful 
swank so delightful to elders who may still enjoy the advan- 
tage of good digestion. 

If now the civilian clears his mind of cant he may even 
enjoy the Army's "swank." 

I refer more particularly to the swank of the professional 
soldier; to him the swank of his regiment is his world's joy. 
In some charming papers contributed to the Times on the 
subject of "Discipline" the curtain is withdrawn, and one is 
enabled to see the world as it presents itself to the eyes of 
the professional soldier. " The regiment " assumes such huge 
proportions in his outlook on life as to dwarf the existence 
of the little world outside; and this constitutes the real 
strength of continued military force under competent direc- 
tion. The collective "will to win" of each unit would be 
irresistible were it not that modern science makes personal 



358 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

heroism of lesser account. This it is that from the point of 
view of primitive passion renders modern war such a sad story. 

But " swank " is not the particular possession of a class. 
Literature has its swankers. Dear old Dr. Johnson is a past- 
master at the art. 

As King Charles's head was to Mr. Dick in " David 
Copperfield," so the war is to-day to his up-to-date counter- 
part — for are we not all Mr. Dicks in 1918? Even in 1914 
the German Socialists caught the infection from those past- 
masters in the art of swank — the Junkers of Prussia — and 
when the flags of victory were fluttering and the joy-bells 
were ringing in Berlin, made common cause and co-operated 
with their enemy. This is one of the subtleties of swank. 
In the individual, as an expression of individuality, it is fre- 
quently charming, and even when ill-fitting to the person may 
still be convincing to his associates. When, however, it 
becomes endemic, as the characteristic of a nation, it is a 
Frankenstein to be destroyed ruthlessly as couch in arable 
land. Swank, in fact, is like a perfume — a little of it goes 
a long way; when it becomes a stink it requires the cool 
breezes of Nature to disperse it. 

How dull would be the pages of history without the 
swankers ! They have all been popular. To go no further 
back than a.d. 1500, Bluff King Hal, Good Queen Bess, the 
Cavaliers, and " the first gentleman in Europe " — to give only 
a few examples. I am not sure but that " Wilhelm," if he 
could have refrained from competition with his son in the 
only method that he knew, would not have gone down to 
posterity as a swanker sans feur et sans re-proche. Germany, 
prior to August, 19 14, in the opinion of most of us, was 
winning hands down as a nation of swankers, the real 
opponent of the United States. Her multimillionaires must 
have caused many a sigh to the German plutocracy whose 
material fruits of prosperity were so heavily pruned by taxa- 
tion for purposes of war. ^ 

The title to fame of King Solomon lay not in his appre- 
ciation of the fair sex (although, no doubt, he showed in this 
connection his proverbial wisdom), but in the temple that he 
built. That is a superb instance of wisely-directed swank. 
Of course, Solomon was a materialist, but perhaps that was 
because he was a kingf. 

No ! Swank must express itself in terms of construction, 
not necessarily in temples built with hands ; but build it must, 
and, moreover, the swanker, if cribbed, cabined, and confined 



SWANK 359 

by the conventions of his own country, should, if youthful, 
" find himself " in another with a wider horizon. The most 
amusing illustration of swank is, as a rule, to be found in 
the leader columns of the London daily Press. There the 
reader is assured that the course of action taken by a Minister 
has been already " suggested in our columns " ; but there are 
occasions when journalistic swank is a cause of regret. On 
July 2 1 St, 191 7, on the occasion of the celebration of Bel- 
gium's Independence Day, a leading London daily (not one 
of the choice flowers of the Northcliffe bouquet), after a 
highly eulogistic article upon the sacrifices that Belgium had 
made for the cause of the Allies, printed at full length in an 
adjoining column a list of all the cash contributions that had 
been made by the British Empire on her behalf. So much 
self-sacrifice on the part of one nation, so much cash on the 
part of the British Empire. No wonder that we are judged 
by others as a nation of shopkeepers, when really we can't 
keep shop for nuts. We are a little better now since the late 
Sir R. Burbidge showed us the way. Our real failure as 
a nation is that we keep disorderly minds, hence our dis- 
orderly shopkeeping. The old early- Victorian higgledy- 
piggledy — with the accent on the piggledy — describes the 
state of chaos in which we lived, moved, and had our being. 
A frank recognition of the anarchy which is rampant would 
be a first step to the restitution of order. A swanky illustra- 
tion occurs to me. On the outbreak of fire upon premises, 
or the sinking of a ship, being imminent, the preservation of 
life that to each individual who may be on the scene is the 
thing most to be desired Is uppermost In each Individual 
mind. What happens If the John Bull Instinct prevails? T 
beg pardon, I mean the brute Instinct. If that " Independent" 
spirit prevails in which every public school boy has been care- 
fully trained, well, I had rather not be among such a crew at 
such a moment; on the other hand, if the fire drill of a council 
school has been their privilege, it Is an Incident in the life 
of those who go down to the sea In ships. No striking an 
attitude here; "simply stand aside for the women and chil- 
dren," to the sound of the swanky orchestra, as the news- 
papers would have it, If you like, playing " Onward, Christian 
Soldiers." 

We are all soldiers nowadays, and therefore, of course, 
our Individual courage is beyond dispute. It really was too 
bad of that cynical Frenchman to write that the Balaclava 
Charge " was magnificent but not war," when we know It was 



36o THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

all part of that "glorious adventure," "the Crimean War." 
Lord Salisbury, an irrepressible Cecil — as I have heard his son 
Hughie described — went one better, saying in the House of 
Lords that we had put our money on the wrong horse. 
"What are you to think?" as Dan Leno used to say. Of 
course, under similar circumstances, the thing to do is not to 
think at all. Englishmen will not find that a hard saying. 
" Yours not to reason w^hy, yours but to do and die," as an 
early- Victorian poet wrote in this connection. 

" Those dear delightful boys," as I remember a scout- 
master, an ex-cavalry subaltern, used to say to me, who made 
corporal punishment de rigueur in his troop a year before 
the war, and when foolish mothers objected expressed sur- 
prise that they could not appreciate public school privileges. 
He is a charming fellow in every other way, though I doubt 
if he could have spelled or even understood that mongrel 
word "malnutrition" as an excuse for lack of appreciation 
of one of the blessings of a public school. " His not to 
reason why, his but to do and die." I don't want this en- 
deavour to reduce swank' to its true proportions to peter out 
in a series of interrogations, but can any soldier reader tell 
me why the swank of the dashing cavalry leader, except he 
be an Allenby or a Byng, seems to come to grief when he is 
in supreme command, notwithstanding that, as in Meso- 
potamia, he may "revel in responsibility"? It is sad that 
the fine flower of swank should wither and decay. There 
are exceptions, however. If only Lord Milner in his youth 
had not, under the guidance of the late William Stead, wan- 
dered "through the labyrinths" of journalism; as a Beau 
Sabreur. " Damn the consequences," as a rallying cry, 
might have rung down the corridors of history and given him 
a niche in the temple of Fame. Whereas in the mouth of a 
statesman the words will prove a boomerang. Swank, com- 
bined with a sense of humour, should form part of the equip- 
ment of every diplomat. How light the touch of Mr. Gerard, 
for example, the late American Ambassador in Berlin, when, 
as stated in his " Memoirs," he asks what the Germans would 
do to him if he shot the savage dogs in the prisoners' camp 
at Wittenberg? Self-expression is the mother of swank. It 
has been anathema to a decadent aristocracy that had nothing 
(since the days of the Regent and the decline of the Hay- 
market) but its vices to express. Perhaps as a disease they 
were driven beneath the surface? But with the birth of new 
ideals in education and votes for women the real superman 



SWANK 361 

should come to his own. The necessity for organised effort 
during the war has torn to tatters the motley of the mere 
swanker and discovered the man and woman underneath — 
and the war also has shown up the difference between the 
spasmodic impulse of emotion and the determined resolve 
of resolute service for the sake of humanity. 

How the members of the Anti-Socialist Union, sand- 
wiched between the Duke of Devonshire and the Duke of 
Westminster, with its princely revenues before the war, 
^'strictly non-farty,^' too, so not taboo in these years of 
Dora, must chuckle at the bondage under which the free- 
dom-loving, easy-going Englishman has groaned as he sees 
German methods of discipline being enforced in this country. 
" Verboten " is as familiar to us in winning the war as it is 
to our cousins in losing it. Democratic law is in abeyance in 
time of war, silent leges inter arma, despite the protests of 
our two Shaws;^ — the fear is lest the evil spirits summoned 
from the vasty deep may not be exorcised when the war ends, 
unless the Labour Party come to the rescue with that " splen- 
did audacity " Mr. Lloyd George urges them to adopt. " The 
Strength of Britain " plus the Premier, it seems, cannot cope 
with the swank of the Liquor Autocrat. Britain's Anno 
Domini surely should be written " Authority and Drink," 19 18. 
As an Englishman I should not have dared to write the above, 
but am emboldened by the fact that the Vice-Chancellor of the 
University of Oxford has written, in 19 16, that " the English 
people are extremely deficient in the desire for truth as such," 
and it is rather a swanky thing to be the exception. Perhaps 
I might leave it at that, but A.D. also stands for Arrested 
Development, as contrasted with the United States of America. 
A.D. may account for the stunted growth of European 
civilisation except in Albania and Montenegiro, where the 
primitive passions still have the healthy play that prevailed in 
the mining camps that Bret Harte, and latterly Rex Beach, has 
described for us. That is the rock ahead in Internationalism. 
Evil communications corrupt good manners, although it is 
unlikely that we shall avenge injuries, real or imaginary, by 
shooting at sight for fear of the consequences. 

Is it because I admire swank, or am a doubting Thomas, that 
I suspect that the Caesar to whom Mrs. Hobhouse makes her 
heartrending appeal is dead, or perhaps, let us hope only for 
the time being "gassed," by the Germans, and may survive? 

1 Lord Shaw, judgment in A.'^Zadig v. Halliday ,' May i, 1917, and George 
Bernard Shaw. 



362 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

It has seemed to me that two common denominators of the race 
are the cradle and the grave, with a liberal allowance of 
Eugenics, for the former to improve the creation. What really 
is the worry is our pardonable swankiness over our little pos- 
sible possession of three-score years and ten. There really is 
no harm in the desire of most of us to hurry things up a bit ; we 
can't all be oaks; some of us feel quite complete as mush- 
rooms, and the power to persist is surely only a question of 
degree. Personally, I recommend a stroll in a country church- 
yard to those of good digestion as a remedy for discontent ; if 
they must still swank they must come inside the Church; if 
still discontented go on to Westminster Abbey. As before 
Waterloo English babies were subdued by threats of " Boney," 
in Victorian days mothers and nurses used to expect con- 
trition for supposed faults by announcing that " authority," 
in the person of nurse or mother (with father in the back- 
ground), was "shocked." Would that I, who have so often 
heard this shibboleth, had been sufficiently precocious to say, 
"And what then?" Now in these days, as Professor Mac- 
Neill says in his article on " War and Reconstruction," in The 
English Review for September, 191 7, "Let me not be met 
with senile cries of ' sedition and treason.' Authority has by 
force too long gibbered in the seats of the mighty. Give reason 
a chance, and see what happens." Everyone desires to func- 
tion; let them function at their best, swank for all they are 
worth, each in his degree — Mr. Bottomley, with Mrs. Pank- 
hurst, Mr. Lloyd George, the Bishop of London, Mr. Ben 
Tillett, and Mr. E. D. Morel, and let them all come. If, how- 
ever, the bold buccaneer in the making is set to do research 
work, or Mr. George Bernard Shaw is expected to make tele- 
phones because he has been told to, we shall continue to make 
a hideous mess of our future civilisation as we seem to have 
done in the past quod erat demonstrand^nn. It might give us 
pause to reflect that the peoples of two of the misgoverned 
countries in Europe — Russia and Ireland — should be occu- 
pied in discussion as to how they should govern themselves in 
the future when the Allies are engaged in a life and death 
struggle with the two autocratic Powers of Central Europe 
who in the name of Kultur claim the right to govern other 
people. 

(7^r> he contmued) 



Housing 

The Local Government Board Memorandum 

By A. Randall Wells 

For those to whom the only compensation for the horrors 
of the last years has been the hope that war, like a colossal 
plough, would turn up the soured and caked soil and the 
tangled roots of those weeds that have disfigured society and 
choked Governments and their departments, and that the 
strong light of publicity and reason that would wither these 
roots would simultaneously revitalise the soil, so that the seeds 
of a nation's aspirations, falling into it and being watered by 
the hot tears shed for their dead, would generate and sprout 
with the beginnings of realisation — bursting upwards in up- 
springing shoots and new growths, clean, young, beautiful, and 
already cloaked with tiny myriad buds promising future fruit — 
for those there could be no more depressing experience than 
to read the Local Government Board's Memorandum on 
Housing, dated November, 191 7. 

Its full title is " Memorandum for the use of Local Authori- 
ties with respect to the Provision and Arrangement of Houses 
for the Working Classes." God help any local authority that 
is so benighted as to find enlightenment here ! It would be 
pitiable, if it dealt with matter that was neither of great 
urgency nor importance; but professing, as it does, to give 
authoritative advice upon a subject of immediate, vital, 
national interest, it arouses, rather than pity, deep indignation. 

The memorandum is well printed upon good white paper, 
and is in a stout lavender-coloured wrapper. It contains 
seven pages of text and twelve clearly reproduced diagrams. 
In form it is a good enough piece of work, and obviously, in 
November of the year 19 17, not a cheap one. And it is all 
sheer waste ! There is not a word of advice or a single plan 
in it that is of the slightest value for the purpose defined. 

The Text. 

In the text, the recommendations that are acceptable are 
mere commonplaces, too trite to need repetition. To give a 



364 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

few examples of these platitudes that are served up as the 
last words of a great Government's expert department upon 
scientific housing ! : — 

" In designing houses for the working classes, the first consideration is 
that they shall meet the reasonable needs of the class of persons whom it 
is proposed to accommodate." 

" Due regard should be paid to the healthiness of the site and to the con- 
venience of its situation for the prospective tenants." 

"A site which can be purchased at a low price may prove expensive to 
build on." 

"Overcrowding of houses on a site should be avoided." 
" Bedrooms should be as large and airy as practicable." 
"The doors, windows, and fireplaces in the bedrooms should be arranged 
so as to secure convenient spaces for the bed and furniture. . . ." 
"... windows should be made to open. . . ." 
"A store for food and one for fuel should be provided." 
" Separate [closet] accommodation should be provided for each house. . . ." 
"The approximate cost of each dwelling may be obtained by multiplying 
the cubic contents by the current cost per foot cube in the locality in which 
the dwelling is to be erected." 

And so on — all more suitable for the lower form of a 
school than for a modern housing committee. 

Of bad advice there are two or three flagrant examples. 
For instance this : — 

" It is best to place the bath on the ground floor." 

Does the responsible official really believe this ? Does he 
think that the individuals of a worker's family are so funda- 
mentally different from himself, that they would welcome so 
absurd an arrangement? 
And again : — 

" Hot water for the bath and sink can be supplied from a copper in the 
scullery. . , ." 

This means that a separate fire would have to be lighted 
every time a hot bath was needed ; and then the water baled 
from the copper and carried to the bath. Could one get a 
servant who would consent to so wearisome a procedure ? And 
yet this is suggested for people who keep no servant, and who 
have to do all their own work. Does the Local Government 
Board sincerely think that this is the way to get a hot bath ? 

Upon the subject of sanitary accommodation the memo- 
randum reaches the bedrock of its inadequacy. Apart from 
the dictum already quoted that there should be one closet to 
each house, the Board's suggestions are tentative — perhaps 
an earth closet remote from the house, or perhaps a water 
closet near or part of the house, and "access should be under 
cover if possible'' The italics are mine. 

The inference, however, is sharp and clear. The Local 



HOUSING 365 

Government Board in no circumstances advises local authori- 
ties to place an ordinary w.c. in a " working-class house " in 
a position in which its use will harmonise with the dignity and 
convenience of a civilised human being. 

The memorandum offers no reason for this savagery. 
With regard to the bath, it did, in defence of the abnormal 
position suggested, say that a bathroom on the bedroom floor 
" is more expensive." Can one imagine a Board of Agricul- 
ture brochure advising that farm buildings should be planned 
in a way that would cause horses, cows, or pigs perpetual irri- 
tation, because it would be cheaper to build them so ? 

The Plans. 
There are twelve plans, and it is the Board's desire that 
they shall be used as models for models — " ... it would be 
well to bear in mind that houses erected by a local authority 
ought, generally, to be such as will be a model or standard 
for working-class dwellings which may be erected by private 
persons." Any local authority that does bear this in mind 
will not use one of the Board's plans. 

Closet Accommodation. 

Following the text, in no case is a w.c. shown upon the 
bedroom floor level. To understand what this really means 
one must consider it from a personal point of view. We are 
apt to take a handy w.c'., or servants prepared to empty any 
form of slops, too much for granted. Visualise life in one of 
these model cottages with an invalid wife or mother, or a sick 
child, or when one was suffering oneself from diarrhoea or 
biliousness, with, perhaps, only an earth closet remote from 
the house, or, at best, a w.c. that could be reached under cover, 
and no servant, no nurse ! And this not for an experiment, 
but for life. 

Apart from the initial mistake of having no w.c. upon the 
bedroom floor, the w.c.'s in plans Nos. 1,4, 5, and 6 are badly 
placed, near and exactly facing the back doors or scullery 
windows. 

Slops. 
In every plan with the exception of No. 4 all the bedroom 
slops of health, and of sickness, have to be carried through 
the living room. That is, through the room in which all the 
food has to be prepared and eaten. Even if there is not a 
bedridden relative, and the family keeps free from sickness, 



366 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

there will be, in many families, a birth every year or so, with 
the mother from ten days to a month in bed, to say nothing of 
possible early days of sickness following upon conception. 

Larders. 

In no cases are the food stores shown adequate. In plans 
Nos. 3, 4, 6, and 1 1 they are badly placed under the stairs. 
No. 4 suffers additionally by having its window ventilating 
into the same covered passage as that into which the w.c. 
door opens. 

Baths. 

In accordance with the text no plan shows a bath in the 
proper place upon the bedroom floor. 

In plans Nos. i, 5, 8 and lo there are bathrooms leading 
from the sculleries. Six-feet baths are indicated. It is 
obvious that the fuel needed, so unscientifically applied, to 
heat enough water for one of these baths, apart from the 
energy required to carry such a quantity from the living room 
through the scullery, or to bale it from the copper — placed 
outside, in several cases — would preclude their use. Re- 
course would be had to a flat bath or zinc tub taking the 
amount of water that could be heated easily over the fire; and 
the local district visitors would be able to ferret out another 
scandalous instance of the poor who won't use a bath 
when it is given them, but keep the potatoes — or whatever it 
may be — in it. 

In plans Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11 and 12 the bath is placed 
in the scullery. The same remarks apply as to the bathroom 
leading from the scullery, with this addition, that with the 
hardest work no scullery can be kept clean and sweet enough 
to be suitable for a bathroom. The President of the Local 
Government Board would not be giving more than a proper 
recognition to the importance of the bath question in all 
housing reform if he visited his own scullery and those of 
his friends, and after testing them by smell, sight, and touch, 
considered whether he found them to be apartments in which 
he would care to take a bath. 

Cupboards for Brooms, Brushes, Dustpans, Buckets, 

Etc., Etc. 
In plans Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 1 1 and 12 no cupboards 
are shown in which to keep the usual domestic utensils. 



HOUSING 367 

Spaces for Perambulators and Bicycles. 

In no plan is any accommodation shown for either a peram- 
bulator or a bicycle. Both of these, and often more than 
one bicycle, form a part of the necessary possessions of the 
majority of families who would rent houses of this size. 

Is the Board content that the bicycles should be in- 
animate causes of wrath in the sculleries, and the perambu- 
lators a continual sore to good-housewifely eyes in the living 
rooms ? 

Architecture. 

Of building as an art the Board has no conception. That 
it should play a very big part in the housing question is quite 
outside the scope of their imagination. That horizontal shape 
should have any particular relation to vertical shape, or that 
the interior and the exterior of a building should form parts 
of a preconceived whole, is entirely beyond their ken. 

Having given a dozen very definite plans to scale, the 
memorandum ends with this delicious three-lined essay upon 
the architecture {?). The Board "think that the general 
designs and elevations may best be left to be decided by 
local custom or wishes. In this way it is hoped that there 
may be full scope for variety and pleasing effect and that 
the dullness of uniformity may be avoided." This is surely 
worthy of mid-Victorian days ! 

What should have been said in the Memorandum. 

The Local Government Board Memorandum should have 
said that the housing scheme of no local authority would be 
approved that did not contain the following minima .'-7- 

1. That where there was no existing drainage system one 
must be established for the proposed buildings, in which all 
the valuable parts of the sewage would be saved and dis- 
posed of for fertilisation. 

2. That a bathroom, fitted with a bath and a lavatory 
basin, supplied with hot and cold water, and a separate w.c, 
must be provided upon the bedroom floor level; that there 
should be a hot-water supply to the sink, and that the water 
for the system should be heated from a boiler at the back 
of the living-room stove, and, alternatively, from a fire or 
a gas heater in the scullery. 

3. That there should be a supply of electric current for 
light; and that, if this is impossible at the time, tubes with 



368 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

draw-wires should be put in in readiness for the time when 
the supply would be forthcoming. 

4. That there should be a supply of gas or electric current 
for cooking and heating. 

5. That each house must have its own garden, and that 
there must be a provision of common playgrounds, lawns, and 
playing fields. 

6. That every house should have at least one shapely 
room — a shapely living-room. That it would not be sufficient 
to provide so many feet of floor area, and so many feet of 
glass, but these would have to be arranged by an artist. 

It should further have directed the local authorities, that 
where there was no gas or electric current available, to report 
upon the possibilities and to submit schemes for obtaining 
these necessary adjuncts to modern life. 

It should have recommended that consideration should 
be given to the question of fitting a lavatory basin, with 
hot and cold water, in the parents' bedroom. It should have 
suggested that only sanitary fittings finished in permanent 
porcelain enamel should be used, and that it would be well, 
especially in mining districts, to make bathroom floors water- 
tight, to sink them three inches below the general floor level, 
and to provide them with a waste-pipe to carry off super- 
fluous water. 

It should also have advised the local authorities that, 
having filled in their requirements upon the minima skeleton, 
they should employ architects to work out their schemes who 
are accustomed to work for the most leisured and cultivated 
class. It is essential that they should be prepared by men 
with a habit of designing not only for convenience, but for 
aesthetic comfort. 

It is no argument against this advice to point out that 
snobbishness among working people often overrides all 
sense of fitness and beauty — it does with few exceptions 
in every set. Apart from this, they are particularly respon- 
sive to form and colour. 



A World Declaration of Rights 

By Austin Harrison 

In the historic proclamation of President Wilson (September 
27th) these words stand out: "It is the peculiarity of this 
great war that, while statesmen have seemed to cast about 
for definitions of their furfose and have sometimes seemed 
to shift their ground and their point of view, the thought of 
the mass of men, whom statesmen are supposed to instruct 
and lead, has grown more and more unclouded, more and 
more certain of what it is they are fighting for. National 
purposes have fallen more and more into the background, and 
the common purpose of enlightened mankind has taken their 
place. The counsels of plain men have become on all hands 
more simple and straightforward and more unified than the 
counsels of sophisticated men of affairs, who still retain the 
impression that they are playing a game of power and play- 
ing for high stakes. That is why I have said that this is a 
people's war, not a statesman's. Statesmen must follow the 
clarified common thought or be broken." This utterance, 
which is nothing less than a judgment, indicates the moving 
spirit of the new international principle, which not only 
now will end the war, but will seek nationally and internation- 
ally to provide securities for civilisation against war. Here, 
of course, is a new thing in history. It is the finest expression 
of democracy, by which we understand opportunity or pro- 
gress. It means that the great war is to end as no previous 
war ever has ended — on the novel issue of morality. 

For this great end America came into the war, and this 
is the meaning of the League of Nations. Morality may be 
described as the law of human relations — Primum vivere, or, 
as it is known in the New World, opportunity. To quote 
Mr. Wilson again: "First, the impartial justice meted out 
must involve no discrimination between those to whom we 
wish to be just and those to whom we do not wish to be just. 
It must be a justice that plays no favourites and knows no 
standards but the equal rights of the several peoples con- 
cerned." 

No victor has ever spoken like this before, for it is the 
voice of construction, not of destruction. It is the truth of 



370 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

deliverance : from the fetters of feudalism ; from the old 
European order of power and the balance of power; from 
the old-time peace of imposition and expropriation ; from the 
militarism of the map. The appeal is to the common sanc- 
tion of mankind. We are invited as victors to the Peace 
Conference not to impose the penal will of the conqueror, but 
to collaborate in a common scheme of reconstruction working 
with and for the whole. As the Belgian, Henri Lambert, who 
seems destined to take the place of Jaures as the intellectual 
leader of European social economics, has said : " Men must 
co-operate economically and morally, or they must fight. 
That is to say, they must increase their economic and moral 
co-operation, and all together, through exchange of service 
or mutual help, advance in physical, moral, and spiritual wel- 
fare, and thus accelerate their contribution to the universal 
final accomplishment. Men, therefore, must co-operate — 
that is, progress — or fight." 

Clearly in this spirit the American President summons 
the world to build. Implicitly and explicitly his principle 
implies the negation of the German doctrine of force, for in 
such foundations the " healthy selfishness " of Bismarck and 
the egocentric philosophy of monarchical militarism have and 
can have no place. It strikes at the roots of feudalism and 
territorial values; of the imperialism of force associations; 
of the old order of dynasties and the Nation-State as written 
by the historians. 

Hitherto international morality has been but the dream 
of a few ideologues ; it has not formed part of man's culture, 
whether from the minds of churchmen, jurists, professors, 
writers, or politicians, or even of so-called pacifists; from 
women no such thought has ever emanated. This failure on 
the part of the cultured and creative people in Europe we 
can see to-day in the light of the new wisdom that is dawning, 
to emerge as perhaps the strangest phenomenon of our time 
and civilisation. Yet the reason is not far to seek. Napo- 
leonism ended on a power value, its reaction was the " blood 
and iron" statesmanship of Bismarck. Between Waterloo 
and the year 19 14 no new attitude towards war had come 
into Europe, because men refused to face the truth that law, 
unless founded on morality — the fatefulness of which (to 
quote H. Lambert again) in human conduct and affairs is 
inexorable — is merely an expression of force, and as such 
may be broken by force, more the " scrap of paper," unless 
It be the harmony of natural relations moving as the expres- 



A WORLD DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 371 

sion and sanction of the age. For the last fifty years Europe 
has known no ethic of international relations. Only force 
values have dominated. And so, at the crash, the covenants 
of international law were found to be the reeds of an arti- 
ficial civilisation, as is bound to be the case with all enforced 
or organised "morality" that does not spring from the 
spirituality of mankind. 

This kind of morality or legal artificiality is to go. We 
are offered a new era and a new orientation. But to bring 
this about, obviously the conditions which cause war must 
first be removed. In a word, the claim of power sovereignty 
is to give way to an ethic or governing principle of human 
relationship. In the place of diplomacy acting in secrecy 
for purely selfish or national motives, Europe is bidden to 
the forum of publicity, bidden to regard the opportunity of 
the whole, bidden to the law of a commonwealth. 

As Mr. Wilson has said, this morality can only come into 
being at a Peace Conference which accepts as the settled 
law of civilisation the principles which are to govern the 
constitution of a League of Nations. It is not a question of 
the map, face Mr. Balfour, who in his speech of September 
30th appeared still to be thinking in power or territorial 
values. The problem in all the essentials is cosmic and in 
that vital sense democratic. We are not asked as soldier- 
statesmen to meet in spurs and feathers merely to pass sen- 
tence of death upon German militarism — that is, the pre- 
condition of assembly. Our task is infinitely wider than that 
of diplomatic protocol and incomparably more difficult. Our 
business will be construction. To establish a World Declara- 
tion of Rights, applicable to all subject peoples; to rebuild 
Europe on a basis of racial and economic freedom ; to give 
to the parts the values and opportunities of the whole. 

So profound a revolution, more pregnant with hope than 
any movement since the preachings of Christ, can never 
spring from a pistol ; it cannot, that is, be founded on force. 
Nor is it a question of juridical form and formula. Its sanc- 
tion must be inborn, induced — the evolution of harmony. 
Peace can never be established on a durable basis through the 
organisation of international councils of control ; by police 
machinery; still less by penal or constrictive impositions. 
That is the old — the Napoleonic, the German — way. 
The new way can only hope for success as some accepted 
pattern of justice, the definition of which may roughly be 
described as opportunity. And that is root. If militarism 



372 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

is to be removed from the ambitions of men as well as of 
kings, its polarity — sacrifice — must be the life principle. All 
must go to the table of peace ready to give and to give up; 
to found a charter of international rights based, not on force, 
but on the sanction of free peoples. 

If Mr. Wilson's ideal of a " reign of law based upon the 
consent of the governed and sustained by the organised 
opinion of mankind " is to be the issue of these terrible years 
of war, it is obvious that the first heed is publicity. A Peace 
Conference of diplomatists, of tired and neurasthenic states- 
men, half-blinded by hatred and conquistadorial dreams of 
vengeance and retribution, is unthinkable. Such men have 
neither the calibre of mind nor the intellectual freedom to 
meet In hopeful constructiveness. 

Another Hague Congress, the wretched intrigue, secretive- 
ness, humbug, and futility of which I witnessed on the spot, 
will not be tolerated by the peoples. Constructive work 
would be found to be impossible in the ordinary diplomatic 
conditions. Armageddon cannot end in that kind of a farce. 
Still less can it end in the saturnalia of dinners, tea-parties, 
balls, intrigues, conspiracies, uniforms and regalia common 
to the Peace Congresses of the past. 

The thing must be done in full publicity. It can only 
be attempted on rigid lines of principle. All censorship must 
he removed in all the countries concerned. The voice of the 
peoples must make itself felt, directing the voice of the con- 
ference. For only so can there be any " demonstration " of 
the new thought essential to release, or any manifestation of 
sacrifice. Yet this would seem as yet Imperfectly understood, 
to judge by the map-thinking of the Press. Many of these 
gentlemen are not yet on the gangway of Mr. Wilson's boat. 
They apparently have yet to learn the morality of the world's 
crusade, to understand that the Peace Conference of 191 8 
will not be a conqueror's assizes of war, but a democratic 
areopagus of peace. It Is the world's difficulty; it will be 
Mr. Wilson's opportunity. Only he, speaking with the un- 
rivalled authority of the supreme controller, can modernise a 
European conference of war and hold the balance. And, 
again, only principle will avail. If the Conference is not to 
deteriorate into the usual diplomatic struggle of intrigue and 
Interest, the direction must deal only in principle. Day by 
day the world must know exactly what is happening at the 
Congress. The soldier, as soldier, should have no place. 
This is indeed vital if we are to think In terms of opportunity 



A WORLD DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 2,7Z 

or morality instead of strategically, and especially should this 
condition apply to the enemy representation. 

And as we shall not be treating with men of war, so there 
will be no room for the sentimentalist. All deflections of 
extremists — and they are likely to be many — can only weaken 
the common purpose, and they must be resisted. Of enor- 
mous importance in this respect will be the attitude of the 
Press. Its responsibility will be the test of democratic 
sincerity. 

And this must be faced by Governments and people, or 
there will be no League of Nations peace, but only a settle- 
ment of interest based on force values, which will amount to 
little more than a transvaluation of power. Yet this, too, cannot 
be, in the absence of a reconstituted militarist Russia, which, 
again, for a decade at least, can be discounted. The problem, 
therefore, is doubly complex, even as one of balance. So much 
is obvious. We must make up our minds. Either Mr. Wil- 
son's message implies that the world makes a joint intelligent 
attempt to win to a new attitude towards war and the causes 
of war, or the League of Nations is a phrase. If the former, 
then sincerity is the paramount condition of our purpose; if 
the latter, then Europe will remain militarist. 

The question which men will have to ask themselves is 
twofold : not only — Is it worth while trying to put an end to 
the militarist State ^ but What is the alternative } Conscience 
and, I fancy, youth will surely answer the first question; the 
imagination literally reels at the prospects of a non-solution. 
Yet this is the real difficulty, and it is here that the logical 
mind recoils. The thing seems Utopian, for the compelling- 
restraint is fear. Nations and Empires fear one another, and 
this is the determinant. It is this motive which prompts men 
to demand a punitive peace, or what are called guarantees. 
It is fear which led to the group armament system, fear on the 
part of Germany which induced her to challenge Europe. 

Now a true League of Nations cannot be founded on the 
fear of a dominant group, because life is not stationary, and 
nations change, rise and fall, like men, from within just as 
much as from without. When we talk of security, therefore, 
we must think honestly or we shall find ourselves once more 
moving along the avenues of fear, building, not co-operatively 
— that is, progressively — but interestedly, or backwardly. 
The starting-point of endeavour must, of course, be the 
elimination of the philosophy of force, or the return of Ger- 
many to reason. But that attainment is now assured. We 



374 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

can count upon that at least as the foundation of our Euro- 
pean task. The problem then will depend far more upon 
trust than upon any human contrivance of security, as we in 
this country should have no difficulty in grasping at the con- 
templation of the Boer countries under Kruger and during 
the war under General Botha. 

Europe's difficulty will be — her age, her cynicism, and 
were Europe left to herself to fashion a new world, I would 
entertain no hope. The chemistry of martialism, out of which 
Europe has grown to her present shape, cannot be expected 
to change through the emotionalism of mere consequence ; 
in Europe man has fought and bled too long. Our histories 
reek with the deeds of war, they contain practically no other 
record. No statesman in Europe has ever ventured to de- 
nounce the " Christianity " of fear which has ruled nations and 
Empires, churches and peoples, and at this hour, with the 
exception of a few sectarian outcries of negativism, no such 
voice is heard. Alone, Europe in the article of her feudal 
death could hardly dare to mould herself upon an ethic, but 
to-day the responsibility of Europe has become cosmic, and 
it lies in the keeping of the New World. 

That is the great new fact which will condition the issue 
of the war. When Europe accepted xA^merican aid, when we 
commemorated the Fourth of July, she capitulated to the 
spirit of opportunity, to the spirituality of young America. 
To many this assertion may seem absurd, yet those who have 
read Mr. Wilson's pronouncements must admit that they do 
not reflect the spirit of European politicians and that no 
statesman in Europe has ever spoken in so lofty a tone. I 
have heard men describe this intention as " bluff." Nothing 
of the kind. The Wilson policy has been known for two 
years. America contains within her a spirituality not to be 
found in cynical, war-worn Europe. It may be seen in the 
primitive home life there; it is reflected in the young en- 
thusiasm of her resolve ; its incarnation reposes in the im- 
partial outlook of the President. Morally and militarily, 
Europe has failed. If America has redressed the balance, 
it is most certainly not to reconsolidate the old order of 
power values, as the mere ally of war, but to assist in the 
foundation of a new order — " the reign of law sustained by 
the organised opinion of mankind." 

These are not the words of le^al sophistry or unctuous 
rectitude, as Europe knows them. They constitute America's 
message and the American war purpose. With the rugged 



A WORLD DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 375 

ardour of America's great poet, Mr. Wilson addresses " that 
vast Rondure " through the soaking battle-ground of Europe, 
and in his intention we may descry the coming of that poet 
of construction sung by Walt Whitman, " whose thought be- 
gins to span " the universe. 

That or nothing. Either an attempt to restart Europe 
on some accepted law or morality of co-operative utility in- 
stead of competitive force with the object of removing the 
causes of war, or we shall achieve nothing permanent, little 
indeed that is constructively hopeful for the future. And in 
that case Europe will have failed, and the armed State will 
continue jealous and full of fear, and there will be no hope 
but in revolution. I cannot take this materialist view, and 
my reasons are entirely materialistic. Not religion, or senti- 
ment, or love, or exhaustion will bring about a new attitude, 
but the simple condition of European control which has 
passed absolutely to America. From this consequence of the 
great war Europe has no escape. As America has brought 
us victory, so she furnishes the new morality. Thus truly the 
war against Germany has become a crusade, not only of just 
wrath, but of redemption. The idea of a League of Nations 
means that or nothing. 

Co-operation instead of ihe patriotism of competition. 
Such is the opportunity that America offers. An ethic. Law 
which has the authority of collective morality as a substitute 
for a Europe of jealousy, toying with the artificiality of 
formula. 

To attain to this altitude of conception Europe is asked 
to "roll up the map.'' Yet in no academic spirit. The 
dreams and sophistries lie in the sentimentality of war, not 
in the materialism of our capacity. It is the vanity of kings 
and politicians which has stabilised the virtue of battle, and 
the heroics of poets. Capitalism is only its handmaid, as we 
can test by the fallacious doctrine that " commerce follows the 
flag." It need not. But we are not asked to lower our flags 
or symbols ; all that is required is that Europe should salute 
a higher flag — the common flag of law : law as the expression 
of the morality of the age. And that, as it is a question of 
collective utility, is a test of individual sincerity, the measure 
of which is sacrifice. This, then, is the corner-stone of the 
League of Nations. 

How are we to obtain the necessary spirit, this new sense 
of sacrifice? I cannot believe that this revolution in human 
relationship can emanate from a Peace Conference ; certainly 



376 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

it can only be formulated in a World Declaration of Rights, 
imposed upon the enemy, ordained, as it were, by the joint 
wisdom of mankind. 

No mere reconstitution of the map of Europe can settle 
the complex problems of race, nationality, interest, religion, 
and wrong, which are the latent causes of the war; nor will 
the principle of " self-determination " carry us much beyond 
political geography. If the object is the stabilisation of inter- 
national order, the map will be useful, but it will not be con- 
ditional, because the genius of man is idea. It is the old idea 
that has made Europe the cockpit of history, only the new 
idea — morality — can deflect man's fighting energies. That 
this idea, again, must contain the world's substance of justice 
is obvious, both in its ratification and application. Clearly 
it will be tremendously difficult. It will appear all the more 
difficult because idea necessitates the friction of idea, and the 
greater the friction the clearer the idea is likely to be. And 
this friction, this purging spark, cannot proceed from secrecy. 
We are faced thus with the supreme need of our equipment 
— -publicity. 

As the Times rightly wrote the other day, machinery must 
be started to think out these problems. If, in Mr. Wilson's 
words, " statesmen must follow the clarified common thought 
or be broken," it is plain that special minds must be utilised. 
I can only repeat what we have urged again and again, that 
National Conferences should be convened, charged to offer 
their concerted advice upon the problems of the subject 
peoples; that these Conferences should consider concurrently 
a common agenda; that the proceedings of all these Con- 
ferences should be made public, and that they should be in 
daily telegraphic communication with one another. Some- 
thing of the kind has been done in France, but here we have 
heard of no such assembly of intellect. A Declaration of 
Rights can hardly issue from a bureaucracy; it must come 
from the clash of the best minds of democracy, thinking aloud. 

Every man has the right to know all about the principles 
and problems to be discussed and to contribute towards their 
solution, otherwise we shall not get a people's judgment; 
we shall only have the verdict of interested lawyers and 
politicians. That is why the Peace Conference cannot be the 
prerogative merely of War Cabinets sitting between closed 
doors. The democratic world demands justice. It means to 
impose its publicly formulated will upon feudal Europe as the 
moral law of the future. It does not intend to put up with a 



A WORLD DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 377 

settlement decreed in secrecy by those who by the accident of 
war are to-day its self-constituted masters. A new Europe can 
only be cast by new men, by the robust sanity of democracy 
working in unison with the other democracies of Europe as 
a whole and for a common end. And there will be no League 
of Nations without this democratic consultation. 

To sum up. The Peace Conference convened to establish 
a League of Nations can in no sense be a diplomatic concert; 
it must be the forum of democracy whose business it will be 
primarily and essentially to found a charter of liberties based 
upon the organised consent of the governed, nationally and 
internationally. Its ruling spirit must be sacrifice, its collec- 
tive function justice. For this great end publicity is the in- 
dispensable condition, and the world must be invited to think 
aloud. 

As its purpose will be constructive, and, so far as the 
enemy countries are concerned, virtually dictatorial, all pro- 
blems must be viewed in the light of the whole and always 
from the point of the future security of the world, the object 
not being to crush a foe, but to compel him to accept an order 
of grace in the interest of that whole. In this work the soldier 
is not necessary, because the thought will not be strategic, 
but social or international. If there is to be sincerity we must 
have sincere men, and they must derive that sincerity through 
publicity- 
Even as Europe listens she wonders. America, with a 
population of one hundred millions, has a capacity for four 
hundred millions ; she is in the happy possession of every 
conceivable national resource necessary for complete self- 
dependence and development, except, perhaps, china clay; 
yet she has herself shown no sign of that spirit of sacrifice 
formulated in the President's announcements, and if she is to 
reform the world she also must carry the cross. America has 
hitherto led in the competitive economic war, she has to testify 
to her sincerity in the (new) co-operative economic system. In 
judging of Empire, she will have to convince Europe that 
her own morality is not founded on colour or on any im- 
personal justice that in her case is reserved as personal. And 
this will be the gauge of Mr. Wilson's potentiality. The pro- 
blems of Empire are those of life — population — and here no 
pedagogy will avail ; that is, they are fundamental. If respon- 
sibility, therefore, is to be universal, it is America, who with 
everything in her possession, must bow to the God of her own 
projected new order — sacrifice. 

O 



378 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

Yet a mere conference will not be sufficient except to 
define the conditions of actual peace and the general prin- 
ciples upon which Europe will be invited to collaborate. 
Whole work can only be done by representative National 
Conferences working on a common agenda in close touch one 
with the other and in full publicity before the world. These 
conferences would be consultative and advisory to the inter- 
national senate, which probably would have to remain a 
directorship of four or five of the Great Powers. 

In this way, and so far as I can see in this way only, can 
mankind hope for any real solution of the age-long "right" 
of war, and of the causes that hitherto have made war in the 
eyes of peoples just and honourable. By, no other way short 
of police decree, which humanly cannot aspire to be durable, 
can the historic wrongs of Europe be adjusted and righted, 
or any settlement be reached of law based upon morality. 
Perhaps the hardest problem of all will be found to be that 
of Empire and of the rights of Empire under any law of 
consent of the governed, for this will be the supreme test of 
attitude and of constructive statesmanship. 

For the problems are not only international, they are also 
national, and the danger to the constitution of the new fabric 
of law will be found to lie in their application. That is why 
the collective wisdom emanating from these National Con- 
ferences woul'd seem the indispensable condition of the 
success of any permanent international law. 

Now the antecedent condition to such a law of Nations 
must be a Declaration of Rights. 



Foch's Ultimate Blow 

By Major Darnley Stuart-Stephens 

LuDENDORFF " is Withdrawing his lines according to pre- 
arranged plans " — of Foch. The sphynx-like attitude of the 
Generalissimo, which ought to be that of every Commander- 
in-Chief, leaves the enemy's Greater General Staff confronted 
with such a puzzle as the brain of the German war machine 
has never in the history of that institution been called upon 
to solve. For the first time during its evolution, accom- 
plished in sixty years, through the tireless labours of chosen 
officers, whose intellectual activity was constantly nourished 
by the teaching of von Moltke, has its war doctrine been 
proved hopelessly wrong, and incapable when opposed to that 
of a supreme brain which has drawn its inspiration from the 
very source of the Napoleonic art of war.* Years ago, in an 
examination in this Review of the German and French schools 
of military thought, I said, " the doctrine of the Grosser 
General Stab was not proof against criticism," and that of the 
direction of the Prussian Army of 1866, and that of the com- 
bmed German armies in 1870-71 demonstrated its superiority 
in many respects ; it also revealed that its doctrine was based 
on a vicious theory which would in due time be shattered by a 
French soldier who had correctly assimilated the lessons of 
those great masters of the art of war to whom his country 
had given birth. The Berlin General Staff have since 1908 
secretly regarded Foch as a man who some day would give 
them trouble, while openly proclaiming that his theories, as 

* Pierre Bourcet, the greatest Staff Ofificer of the Royal French Army of 
the eighteenth century, wrote for his pupils, when Director of the Staff College, 
a treatise which was not published, but circulated privately among Staff 
students and other officers who could be trusted. One hundred and three years 
later this same work was printed, but not published, by the French Ministry of 
War, when that great humbug, General Boulanger, was at the Boulevard St. 
Germain. The treatise contains the whole art of generalship as understood 
by Napoleon, and it is the more interesting because the principles are illus- 
trated by a series of examples of actions, in almost every one of which Bourcet 
himself had planned the operations. They are also further illustrated by an 
imaginary campaign conducted from the Maritime Alps, of which Bourcet knew 
every inch, and were to be the scene of Napoleon's first essay in planning a cam- 
paign, and in which he exhibited the new generalship of which he alone had 
the secret. The effect of the French Revolution upon the Army was to throw 
everything into confusion, so that the new science and art of war contained 
in the teaching of Bourcet was delayed, and only reappeared after seven years 
of oblivion with the advent of Napoleon. 

Q 2 



38o THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

revealed by his lectures to the Superior School of War, were 
unsound; and the conclusion of his German secret dossier 
was, " He will never be entrusted with a high command owing 
to his clerical associations." 

After the first battle of the Marne the Berlin military 
" big-wigs " took comfort in the belief that strategic ability 
would be neutralised by the incapacity of Foch's colleagues. 
That consolation has been swept aside, as, in his capacity as 
a single Commander-in-Chief entrusted with despotic power, 
he has been enabled to render the chiefs of the many and 
diverse military elements responsible to him practically 
" fool-proof," to use an exceedingly expressive American 
importation. Altogether the position, as I have hinted, is, for 
the enemy's General Staff, an exceedingly puzzling one. 
They still hold the advantage of a central position, and thus 
of being able to work on the system elaborated by Jomini 
under the name of interior lines. They are still in possession 
of a wonderful network of railways — those arteries of the 
battlefield. A glance at the map shows that behind the line 
Ostend — Lille — Busigny — Mezieres there is a very closely- 
woven web of steel tracks, all of which is still at Germany's 
disposal. 

Germany and France are facing each other from Luxem- 
burg to the well-watched Swiss frontier, and from Verdun 
south the French armies are almost within long-range gunfire 
of German territory, and in Alsace actually hold a slice of 
it retaken from the Boche at the very commencement of this 
interminable struggle. The frontier consists of three distinct 
parts — first, in the extreme north, the heights of the Meuse, 
a range of wooded hills, to the east of the river, which rise 
over against the flat plain of the Woevre. 

Verdun, the unconquerable city of all time, marks the 
northern limit of this range, which runs south to the plateaux 
in front of the frontier barriers of Toul and Nancy. Further 
south of the marshes is the Lorraine border of some forty miles 
with its terrain hilly, affording at least half-a-dozen passages, 
which a century ago were regarded as troublesome to nego- 
tiate, but which now our engineers merely laugh at. " Nothing 
is sacred to the sapper." Now under the influence of his 
trade, which every day discovers a better way of doing things, 
we have changed our opinions as to the meaning of what staff 
maps label " natural obstacles." 

Finally, to the south, following the Vosges mountains, still 
considered an insuperable barrier, "Virgin Belfort." France 



FOCH'S ULTIMATE BLOW 381 

governs the threshold to Upper Lorraine. An army deployed 
on Lorraine would possess quite unique advantages. Both 
its flanks would be safe, being covered by Verdun on the left 
and by Belfort on the right. An advance in mass south of 
Metz would flank Germany's greatest western base and com- 
pel not only its evacuation, but also result in the loss of the 
railway lines which feed the Crown Prince's army. Then, in 
possession of the valley where so much desperate fighting took 
place in August, 1870, the invading army would have the 
alternative open to it of either, for political reasons, crossing 
the Rhine, or, for material ones, moving westward, after 
the example of the Germans in 1870, and proceed to recover 
the iron mines of Briey and to threaten the great industrial 
region which is the economic heart of the Empire. 

A massed advance by Foch through Southern Lorraine 
would spell the automatic abandonment of the deserts into 
which the Hun, with his perverse ideas of landscape improve- 
ments, has with immense assiduity converted Picardy and 
Belgium. 

The Boche would not dare to remain on the land he is 
desolating as I write, for his life lines with the Fatherland 
would be in danger (to be in God's good time " improved " 
back into the primitive naked simplicity of the lands where 
lurked a thousand or so years ago the tribes of Teutonic 
barbarians). 

Many reasons tend to suggest that when the Marshal 
carries the war into Germany his line of advance will be 
through that gate which is only held ajar by the southern 
forts of the Metz perimeter. On the declaration of war the 
first operation of General Joffre was to move across the fron- 
tier of the lost province a couple of army corps under that 
much afflicted General, one-armed Pau. 

This offensive, of course, failed, as it at once lost its 
raison d'etre owing to the attack made on France's unpro- 
tected frontier by von Gluck's host after passing through a 
neutral State. But an advance into Southern Lorraine has 
been a feature of the French plan of campaign ever since the 
French General Staff began in 1875 to study the means of 
redressing the debacle. With the north-west protected, as it 
will be in a few days, by Maubeuge (I am writing on October 
13th) to the south of the Argonne, Foch is likely to revert 
to the original plan which he and General Bonal had so 
much to do with the perfecting of in the late 'nineties. 

Another plan, and a very good one at that, exists in an 



382 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

invasion from this sector, impinging on that vast American 
base of which we hear so little in print, quite near Toul, to 
which a brand-new double-tracked railway built by the U.S.A. 
engineers runs straight as a die from the port (also brand- 
new) of American debarkation. The selection of inland and 
distant Toul on the enemy's frontier, and the degree of 
Yankee hustle that during the last spring and summer has 
been expended in rushing that strategic railway means only 
one thing. 

Still another circumstance that supports — well, we will 
say my surmise — is that on this line of our advance the fight- 
ing would be on the other fellow's property. Foch would 
cease carrying on the devastation of this awful struggle on 
la terre, destroying" our historic cities and towns, making the 
countryside of fair France a shell-pitted waste. Also, unfor- 
tunate Belgium would be saved from further horrors resultant 
on the twentieth-century irruption of the tribes of Teutonic 
barbarism. By this one movement the relief of Belgium 
would be achieved — a relief that might otherwise require a 
succession of offensives to accomplish. 

The enemy appreciate the grim significance for them of 
the great American depot of Toul. Perhaps this explains 
why they attempted to deepen their already overdeep 
salient thrust out in the Crown Prince's spectacular advance 
last April. Strategically, they are moving back, and we must 
admit with masterly skill, upon their last line of resistance 
on occupied territory, which is the last line of " natural " 
defence provided for by the General Staff. That line is the 
Meuse, the head-waters of the Scheldt stretching to the con- 
fluence of the rivers Sambre and Meuse pivoting on Mau- 
beuge, the left flank supported by the strongholds Namur 
and Liege. This will undeniably be a strong line. In the 
meanwhile, we may anticipate the great southern advance 
through Lorraine. 

He may, however, force another concentration of reserves 
against us, a concentration on the soil of the Fatherland, as 
old Moltke, in one of his tactical lectures before the Army 
Staff, foretold would be " a hard nut for an enemy to crack," 
and oblige Marshal Foch to deliver another blow against the 
last, the ultimate Hindenburg Line, of the existence of which 
I have, for two years past, preached in the columns of this 
Review, and which, in turn, would require another readjust- 
ment of the fast dwindling German military man-power. In 
view of a decision, this process might be hoped to develop 



FOCH'S ULTIMATE BLOW 383 

the inevitable weak spot in the line through which we 
Britishers might go, and begin the process of dividing and 
enfolding the German defensive, just as Ludendorff essayed 
to carry out in last March, when he struck with a massed 
attack at the critical point of junction between Haig's and 
Petain's armies. 

But, as against this theory, the fact remains that Haig 
will, after early November, find his great army confronted by 
a glacis of oozy, nigh to impenetrable mud, while operations 
in Lorraine are often quite feasible, after the early winter rain 
has turned the northern flank of the Western front into a 
veritable quagmire. Therefore it seems that Marshal Foch 
will persist in his original intention — that of forcing the pace 
towards Metz. At least I have very good ground for think- 
ing so, when I may state in doing so I am fortified by 
the inspired opinion of one of the superior officers of the 
Marshal's remarkably limited personal staff : " While 
they have spoken with bitter irony when not with 
haughty condescension of our British, and even 
French commanders, the German Press use nothing but 
exceedingly grave, respectful terms when their military 
experts write of Foch. ' Here is one worthy of measuring 
his brains with Moltke.' Such was the appreciation given 
to him in a recent issue of the Gazette de Cologne.'' This is 
the man accurately portrayed in homage paid to him by the 
Germans. These same Germans full well understand what 
is the meaning of the obstacles, natural and artificial, on the 
long, hard road to Metz. Its strength in the ultimate test 
will not depend on its perimeter of the greatest forts in 
Europe, but, like the Belgian Liege, in a much greater sense, 
upon the number of men that the German Army can spare 
to man them. Even from his present position the American 
Commander-in-Chief can at once begin the system-atic reduc- 
tion of the ring of the outer forts protecting Metz. To save 
the city, if the Americans concentrate attacks upon it, the 
Rhine army must dispose of a large field army in front of it 
on the old battlefields of 1870. How large a force this may 
be is indicated by the size of Pershing's main army, which 
is now a million and a half of all arms of the service. Ger- 
many may be able to use a similar number in the thorough 
but costly defence of this great place of arms, but only by 
dangerously deserting the last line of the Hindenburg 
defence. From which it may be gathered that the second 
fall of Metz in half a century is a foregone conclusion. 



Conditions are — Principles of 
Surrender 

By the Editor 

With the acceptance of Mr. Wilson's fourteen points, mili- 
tarist Germany admits defeat, and the admission has excited 
a good deal of speculative confusion concerning peace. The 
President's jEirst answer to the German request for an armistice 
led to the idea that peace would shortly be arranged, but his 
second answer was far more drastic. He referred the ques- 
tion of a cessation of hostilities to his Allied military advisers, 
and, in substance, the Note has been generally interpreted as 
implying unconditional surrender. 

That these pourparlers have brought peace nearer is un- 
deniable. Germany has now surrendered politically because 
militarily she no longer has an objective. She knows that she 
has lost the war. She has nothing left to fight for. The 
question, therefore, is reduced to a matter of amour propre. 
It is for her and for us : How are the Allies to allow the war 
to end.'* 



Upon this point — whether it be regarded as the techni- 
cality of armistice or a purely force problem— ^peace depends. 
We stand near or far from peace according to that decision. 
There are only two ways of looking at the question; more- 
over, it is for us to decide. We can either demand a com- 
plete military surrender, as a result of debacle at the front 
or behind the front, or a complete political surrender, in 
which case we shall be free to impose what military condi- 
tions we please so far as concerns guarantees in the form of 
military occupation of German fortifications, the surrender of 
guns, munitions, or the German Navy. Either in time are 
achievable. Before Christmas undoubtedly the issue will be 
settled one way or the other. 



That is to say, we either within the next month force the 
German armies to lay down their arms, or we cease all parleys 



PRINCIPLES OF SURRENDER 385 

in preparation for the great American attacks next spring. 
If the end comes through military operations, obviously there 
will be no need to discuss terms ; but if the end comes poli- 
tically, that problem must be decided shortly, not only because 
the now modernised German Government have accepted Mr. 
Wilson's conditions, but because indecision on our part might 
lead to an utterly evil confusion both of method and of the 
objective. 



The idea seems to be held that the Germans will cry 
"hands up" and capitulate. I do not believe this. They 
may eventually be forced to, but scarcely while still fighting 
on alien soil. In my opinion, the democratised German 
Government will not, unless compelled to, accept military 
conditions of humiliation, if such be our intention. And that 
is the world's problem. If our aim is to make the Germans 
walk under the Caudine Forks, then I think they will fight 
on to the death whether under a democratic br Socialist 
Government, in which case there would seem no likelihood of 
peace before next summer. The real question is : What do 
we want? 



This is what we have to decide. I consider that we ought 
not, at this tremendous hour in history, to hesitate. Absolute 
unity of aim and method is essential. And our decision 
should be proclaimed before the world as a judgment. The 
lives of tens of thousands of Britons depend upon this pen- 
ultimate step. The length of the war depends upon it. In 
a moral and democratic sense, the issue of the war will depend 
upon it. What are terms of humiliation ? They are, roughly, 
the conditions of Vae Victis. I do not include in such terms 
the removal of the Emperor, because the Kaiser is the in- 
carnation of the Prussian war spirit which the world has deter- 
mined to destroy. By humiliation I mean the Roman 
triumph, the crushing of a people's soul. If that is our object, 
then the war will go on — to the Rhine, and over the Rhine, 
quite possibly as a secondary or guerrilla war deep into the 
interior of Germany. 



In deciding this question we ought not to be governed by 
any fear of the alternative ; which quite conceivably may be 
Bolshevism in Germany, disastrous as such a climax without 
all doubt would be not only to Europe, but to the world 



386 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

generally, and ultimately to the capitalistic system. That 
should not be our deterrent or conditional thought. The sole 
idea which should govern this decision rests upon our objec- 
tive : whether it is constructive or destructive. And here 
we are faced by the League of Nations, which means co- 
operation or nothing. We either, therefore, end the war con- 
structively — that is, we do not unnecessarily humiliate the new- 
born German democracy as it actually exists, in which case 
a new European order based on national freedom and co- 
operation is a possibility — or we stamp on the soul of the 
new German democracy, in which case no League of Nations 
can be born, but at best a group of nations in a league holding 
their authority by force. 

That is, with the aid of America; for the old European 
balance of power has gone. Now if the war is a people's 
war, it must have a people's peace. It is the united force of 
the world which has brought the Germans to their knees, and 
statedly for a world-morality. The responsibility is thus 
cosmic. Conditions cannot be any one nation's specific 
interest or prerogative. It dare not refose on hatred or 
revenge, because in the end the spirit of democracy will fre- 
vail and that s-pirit is international. All future construction 
must depend upon the nature of the issue and the manner of 
its imposition. A new Germany can hardly be born out of 
servitude. More. Enslavement postulates anarchy or Bol- 
shevism, but this is the negation of law — the negation, there- 
fore, of our cause. The war of liberation would then have 
ended in chaos. 



Yet if the world's difficulty is passion or hatred, passion 
cannot be the determinant, precisely because it is the world's 
responsibility. All conditions of peace under the old German 
regime would doubtless have to be force conditions : of mili- 
tary security, of shame as the purging instrument. Yet not 
the latter if a new Germany is to have the life proclaimed as 
our objective again and again in the phrase. "War for demo- 
cracy." It is true that the degree of military security — cer- 
tainly an indispensable condition — may present a difficulty 
in the deliration of martial exultation, yet not so on point of 
principle. We have heard the words a "just" peace ac- 
claimed by all the Allies. The question is : What are " just " 
conditions ? By that I mean the conditions of surrender con- 



PRINCIPLES OF SURRENDER 387 

sistent with (i) the security necessary to the Allies, (2) the 
security of life necessary to any settlement of construction. 
Our question is not, therefore, military; it is social or demo- 
cratic, for the militar}^ issue has been decided. That part of 
the problem is henceforth a matter of degree. It automatically 
ceases to be military in its design and application with the 
assumption of its democratic reality. 



That is why personally I can conceive of no peace signed 
with a German Empire ruled by the HohenzoUerns, for the 
Emperor is the spirit of the mediaeval Germany which in all 
the essentials must go. But when the Emperor has gone, we 
shall be dealing with the German people, and they have 
accepted Mr. Wilson's conditions. That is a different matter, 
and must be regarded in the light of the future if the League 
of Nations is to mean anything at all. Perhaps it does mean 
nothing. Yet I cannot think so. But at least we ought to 
know. Democracy has the right to insist upon a joint Allied 
declaration on this point, and at their peril the Governments 
will refuse. The whole question of armaments depends upon 
this issue, and in the answer all workers and soldiers are con- 
cerned. Because, primarily, it is their responsibility. Be- 
cause, if the future is theirs, the present is their birthright. 
Thus w^e stand at the moral turning-point of the war. 



But a real danger exists. It is that in any way we differ 
in the methods of the objective. During the last few weeks 
we have allowed the enemy to enter into a diplomatic ex- 
change, conducted over the heads of Europe, answered, if 
collectively, at any rate on this side not from the Parliament 
of the nation, but secretly. In quite the old fashion. Is this 
to go on ? This is not the road to regeneration or democratic 
sanction. Militarily and morally, it has a weakening effect 
and gives rise to surmise precisely at the hour when the 
public voice of democracy should be one and inexorable. 
This, as it is our British hour of military triumph, should 
be our deed of statesmanship. It is our judgment that should 
now make itself heard in the councils of the world, our direc- 
tion that should cast the decision, and beyond all " perad- 
venture." The moral issue of the war is our absolute British 
trust. It is not a question of emotion. We cannot "stand 
upon points " for what historically would merely amount to 



388 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

a technicality. In deciding upon any terms of peace or 

surrender, principle must be the British and international 
coefficient. 



It is more than singular that the first genuine German 
demand for peace should have caught the Allies " unpre- 
pared," for that this is so we can all see from the raging con- 
troversy which has broken out in the Press since Mr. Wilson's 
first reply and the great variety of terms suggested in the 
leading newspapers. They have been characterised chiefly 
by absence of principle and are the products of passion. They 
clearly show the want of known policy regarding the end of 
war. They seem to flout the League of Nations' attitude 
unreservedly. The question is, are these manifestations, 
partly of jingoism, partly of passion, to be regarded as 
heroics, or do they represent public opinion? Their reason 
is not logical. Victory won literally by the world in arms is 
not exactly a theme for heroics, yet again that is not the 
question. What we have to deal with is the objective. 
Hitherto these same voices have insisted upon the morality 
of our crusade, which has been rightly called the " war of 
liberation." If that is so, then heroics at this solemn hour 
are out of place. If we are to liberate, we must set free, not 
enslave; now, obviously, conditions which reduced the Ger- 
man people to slavery would constitute the negation of our 
moral objective. 



And, humanly, could not be a permanency. It is con- 
ceivable, of course, that the flame of hatred cannot be 
extinguished by reason, that human nature being what it is 
the full toll of passion must be levied. But, if so, we shall 
greatly lose our moral right of adjudication, nor can we then 
expect to establish on the ashes of retribution a new order 
or law. We are thus brought up against our own purpose, 
upon which all future reconstruction stands or falls. If, for 
instance, a real democratic Germany realises that peace can 
only be obtained by ignominy, morally they would be justified 
in fighting on. A world which continued the war, not to exact 
the necessary terms, but to shame and crush a foe for re- 
venge, would associate itself with the mediaeval spirit, not 
with the modern ; would align itself with the monarchical 
militarism it set out to destroy; would historically justify the 
Kaiser in his doctrine of force. The result inevitably would 



PRINCIPLES OF SURRENDER 389 

be world chaos instead of the proposed " family of nations." 
And the new-born German democracy would be a bastard, 
the Phoenix of revenge. 

f 

It is also reasonably certain that if in the hour of triumph 
we do not act on principle, we are not likely to after peace, 
because there would be no inducement. I have heard men 
say that it is enough if we destroy Germany's force and 
cripple her powers of recovery, for the future will take care 
of itself. But that is poor thinking. It is not to think on 
principle, which again implies chaos. Now the Germans may 
get to the position of testing our principle. They may fight 
their way out of Belgium, and at the Rhine place us before 
the dilemma of carrying war into Germany for a motive un- 
necessary to the acceptance of our fighting principle, and so 
contrary to its purpose. For we stand undoubtedly at the 
end of an epoch, before the dawn of a new order of civilisa- 
tion, political and economic. I do not think individuals 
count much in this fateful drama. The grand principle which 
roused the world to destroy medisevalism is stronger than the 
individual, and the deflections of extremists will not stay its 
march. I think that is the key to the present extraordinarily 
interesting situation. We are the instruments of our own fate, 
and that fate is principle, and when Lord Milner the other 
day seemed to suggest in an interview that the Kaiser should 
not be driven from the throne, he reflected the fear of his 
own morality. 



How are we to allow the war to end ? The answer must 
surely be sought in our objective. If our aim is retribution, ven- 
geance, punishment, domination, our course is prescribed, and 
historians may have to chronicle the end of Armageddon in 
the sack of Berlin. There will still remain Russia. There 
will then remain democracy. If, however, we are fighting for 
principle, the end must form part of the covenant of that 
principle. Clearly that principle is cosmic, for this is no 
national struggle, and the alternative to an international solu- 
tion is chaos. We must hold to that in our own and the 
world's opportunities. And we must be careful, or we may 
be manoeuvred into a position of insincerity towards ourselves 
and the common responsibility. As we did not seek this war 
or enter into it for military vainglory, which in itself is mean- 
ino^less in the conditions of a world convocation of force. 



390 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

neither have we endured such unparalleled sacrifice merely 
to enjoy the " fortunes of war," but to win to a new order. 
Our beacon then is principle, and any deviation from that 
truth can but lead into error. The problem, therefore, is not 
that of a formula or of a technicality, but of responsibility, and 
would seem entirely straightforward. It is militarily to im- 
pose the world's justice upon the enemy as a principle of 
civilisation, thus morally to secure its application on the lines 
and in the spirit of its inspiration. 



Books 



Russia. By Michael S. Farbman. (Allen and Unwin, Ltd.) 55. net. 

All men wishing to understand the causes which drove Russia into 
revolution, and subsequently into Bolshevism, should read Mr. Farbman's 
pithy, if unpleasant, book. Unpleasant because incidentally it is an 
indictment of our Press, which systematically obscured the truth about 
Russia in the first three years of the war in the fable with the " steam- 
roller. " Perhaps this criticism, however just from his point of view, 
might with advantage have been omitted, for it will offend. Otherwise 
the book is remarkably interesting. Step by step the author traces the 
causes of disintegration, shows why even in agriculture Russia came to 
grief, unfolds the terrible drama of the inner conflict which went on 
from the first days of war between the Tsarist regime and the people 
until that fateful hour when " the Government which had begun the war 
with the idea of avoiding revolution came to the idea of making' peace 
in order to prevent the revolution." Here we have the key to the 
Russian enigma. As control got more and more out of hand with 
the growing chaos of conditions, economic, social, and political, the 
Russian Government determined upon peace, the agent was Protopopov. 
Petersburg was to be starved into riot, then the police were to crush 
the "revolution " with machine-guns, and make peace. But the demo- 
cratisation of Russia had gone too far, the Army fraternised, the sham 
revolution became a national one. Mr. Farbman is very definite about 
Kerensky's role, which, he declares, history will condemn. He refers 
to Kerensky's responsibility for the July offensive, which led to the 
debacle of the Russian forces. It is notable that the sub-title to the 
book is "The Struggle for Peace." It was peace that the revolution 
wanted. By forcing revolutionary Russia to fight, we forced her into 
extremism, because we split up the balance of her revolutionary unity. 
Reason abdicated. Mob licence obtained the upper hand. Under the 
Soviets Russia passed out of the war, out of the scheme of European 
principle, into the anarchy of negativism. 

Of illuminating significance are Farbman's frequent references to the 
Army as "the poor little grey cattle," the Russian equivalent for 
"Tommy." Men hated the Army before the war. Never was there the 
enthusiasm for the Army depicted in our newspapers, for the Army to 
the Russians implied authority. The "steam-roller" was corrupt at 
the top, without enthusiasm in the ranks. It was betrayed by its 
generals and politicians, in turn it betrayed the State. Such is the story. 
And such is the moral of our enthusiasm for Russia under the Tsar and 
our want of understanding for Russia in revolution. 

Cities and Sea Coasts and Islands. By Arthur Symons. Collins. 
75. 6d. net. 

A series of travel studies by one of the most subtle of our impres- 
sionists. Mr. Symons has "rich eyes" and the gift of translating not 
only the visible aspect of the many beautiful places he has known, but 
their spiritual significance into sensitive and delicate words. There are 



392 THE ENGLISH REVIEW 

three divisions to the book. A first, devoted to Spain ("Cities and 
Artists" this might be called); a second, made up of London studies, 
highly characteristic; and a third, containing various coast pictures, 
including the fascinating "Dieppe," which was among the jewels of the 
first volume of the Savoy. (Though one misses that amazing decoration, 
the bathing lady, as spirited a piece of impertinence as any that Beardsley 
ever perpetrated.) I have called the London pictures characteristic — 
there is a night-piece, streets before and after the emptying of the 
theatres, full of the very atmosphere of the 'nineties, in which I suppose 
it to have been written. Certainly not of these modern evenings could 
it be said: "The lights glitter outside theatres and music-halls and 
restaurants ; lights coruscate, flash from the walls, dart from the 
vehicles ; a dark tangle of roofs and horses knots itself together and 
swiftly separates at every moment ; all the pavements are aswarm with 
people hurrying." The flashing of it dazzles one's mental vision. O si 
mox — all save perhaps the cab-horses ! 



Only Typewritten Manuscripts will be considered, and altJtough every 
precaution is taken, the Proprietors will not be responsible for the loss or 
damage of the manuscripts that may be sent in for consideration; nor can 
they undertake to return manuscripts which are not accompanied by a stamped 
addressed envelope. 






THE 

LONDON & 
LANCASHIRE 

FIRE 

INSURANCE COMPANY 




Security 



<L^ J ) I . 






P.T.O. 



w; 




-^^^^N--" 



yi 



4 



Pi 



m 



FOR ANY KIND OF 

FIRE 

ACCI DENT 

MARINE 

INSURANCE, APPLY TO 

^be !iLonbon &, Xancasbire 

jfire 3n6urancc Company, Xt^. 

Head Offices: 

45, DALE STREET, LIVERPOOL. 

155. LEADENHALL STREET. LONDON, E.C.3. 



m 




MR. MURRAY'S NEW BOOKS. 

MOON OF ISRAEL. By sir H. rider haggard. The story of the 
Exodus of the Israelites from Egypt, as appeared to an Egyptian, Ana, who took a leading 
part in the circumstances which surrounded that tremendous event. To him they seem 
to represent a war between the God of Israel and the gods of the Egyptians. The love 
interest of the tale is furnished by its heroine, a Hebrew maiden named Merapi, Moon 
of Israel. 7s. n«t. {Shortly. 

MINNIGLEN. By AGNES and EGERTON CASTLE, Author of " Rose o' the 
World," "Incomparable Bellairs," "Wolf Lure," etc. Although " Minniglen "being a 
present-day story, the war inevitably forms its background, the authors strike it in an 
unexpected note. A mystic atmosphere permeates both its vivid social pic ures and its 
passionate love tale. 7s. net, {Shortly. 

CHILDREN OF THE DEAR COTSWOLDS. By Mrs. l. 

ALLEN HARKER, Author of " Miss Esperance and Mr. Wycherly," *' Mr. Wycherly's 
Wards," "Jan and her Job," etc. The children in Mrs. Barker's books are familiar 
friends of the reading public, who in this new volume will be introduced to several new 
and attractive members of the same large family. Our old friends Paul and Fiametta also 
appear on the scene. 7s. net. {Shortly. 

WARRIORS AND STATESMEN. From the liter.ry " Gleanings ' of 
the late EARL BRASSEY. Edited by HORACE G. HUTCHINSON. A selection of 
passages relating to great warriors and statesmen, taken from the volumes of extracts which 
the late Ear! Brassey collected in the course of his wide reading. 9s. net. 

GUILDHALL MEMORIES. ByA. G.TEMPLE, F.S.A. Mr. Templehas 
been Director of the Art Gallery at the Guildhall since l886 and has been brought into 
personal relations with ail the leading City magnates and with the principal British and 
foreign artists of his dav. His anecdotes of these people and of the pe suasion employed to 
overcome the opposition of reluctant lenders for the various loan collections form an unusual 
and interesting record. Illustrated. i6s. net. 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.I 



IMPRESSIONS 

A MAGAZINE FOR PROGRESSIVE PEOPLE 

THERE is no magazine in the world just like IMPRESSIONS. It treats 
business as the most important thing in material Hfe, and shows in a 
fascinating manner how easy it is to get pleasure and a living at the same time. 
There are no technical articles in IMPRESSIONS. The great subject of business 
is handled in a way which provides inspiration for all, whatever their profession 
or trade or calHng. IMPRESSIONS stands for better business and better living 
in the highest sense of the term. It is the monthly mentor of our biggest business 
men, and in its own circle carries an influence more powerful than outsiders can 
understand. It is edited by G. E. Whitehouse, who, in a remarkably short time, 
has earned for himself an international reputation for being the most interesting 
yet fearless writer on Business subjects. He writes a large part of the magazine 
each, month ; says what he thinks, and thinks so nearly right, that big men believe 
in him and applaud his views. IMPRESSIONS is a big magazine, 1 1 in. x 9^ in., 
with 48 pages, full of sound editorials and high grade advertising. If you believe 
in progress you will like this magazine, though you may not agree with everything 
it prints. 

SUBSCRIPTION 61- PER ANNUM. 

Sample copy for six penny stamps. 

IMPRESSIONS PUBLISHING CO., LTD., 76, Hanover Street, EDINBURGH. 



At last your 

SAN ATO GEN 

must cost you more 

TEMPORARY INCREASE UNAVOIDABLE 



Until this — the fifth year of the War — SANATOGEN has 
remained one of the very few good things that have never "gone up." 



Despite the enormous and ever- 
growing increase in the cost of raw 
materials, manufacture, etc. — despite, 
too, the phenomenal demand for 
SANATOGEN and the relative 
scarcity of supplies — we have not 
added even a half -penny to the 
original advertised selling-prices. 

We hoped to maintain that policy: 
had it been commercially possible 
we should have done so. But one 
of the basic ingredients of SANAT- 
OGEN has now become so costly 
that we are compelled either to 
lower the quality of SANATOGEN 
or to raise the retail prices. 

The first course is unthinkable; in 
no circumstances would we make the 
slightest change in the quality of 
SANATOGEN, on which its whole 
virtue depends. We have therefore 
decided to charge a little more for it, 
but with the proviso that the old prices 
will be restored at the earliest possible 
moment. 



Please note carefully the 
following points: — 

( 1 ) Taking the largest - sized tin as a 
standard of comparison the niw cost of 
Sanatogen wo: ks out at slightly less than 2^d. 
per dose, instead of 2d. 

(2) Apart from its wonderful tonic -effects, 
Sanatogen yields so much concentrated luitri- 
ment that it mon than repays its cost in food- 
value alone. 

(3) Medical men and Hospitals will con- 
tinue to be supplied with Sanatogen at 
the old prices. 

(4) The new prices, which take effect as 
from October ist, igi8, are as follows ; — 

9/6 size is now 10/9 
5/- size is now 5/9 
2/9 size is now 3/3 
1/9 size is now 2/3 

(5) The prices of our other preparations 
--including FORMAMINT TABLETS— 
have NOT been increased. 

(6) As the demand for both SANATOGEN 
and FORMAMINT is far in excess of the 
supply, they will have to be strictly 
rationed this winter ; so you should order 
them from your chemist as soon as possible. 



GENATOSAN, LIMITED ( OrUiah Purchaser, of the Sanatogen Company) 
12, CHENIES STREET, LONDON, W.C 1. (Chairman: The Viscounte*. Rhondd.) 



PRINTED IN UT. BRITAIN BY R. CLAY ANI> SONS, LTD., BRUNSWICK ST., STAMFORD ST., LONDON, S.B. I, 

VM» PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE ENGLISH REVIEW (19I I ) LTD., I9 GARRICK ST., LONDON, W.C. 2. 

ADVERTISING OFKICKS : I9 GARRICK STREET, LONDON, W.C. 2. 

REGISTERED FOR CANADIAN POSTAGE. 

EKTKKF.n AT THE NEW YORK POST OFFICE AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER. 