ENOCH EMERY had borrowed his landlady’s umbrella and he discovered as he
stood in the entrance of the drugstore, trying to open it, that it was at least as old
as she was. When he finally got it hoisted, he pushed his dark glasses back on his
eyes and re-entered the downpour.
The umbrella was one his landlady had stopped using fifteen years before
(which was the only reason she had lent it to him) and as soon as the rain touched
the top of it, it came down with a shriek and stabbed him in the back of the neck.
He ran a few feet with it over his head and then backed into another store entrance
and removed it. Then to get it up again, he had to place the tip of it on the ground
and ram it open with his foot. He ran out again, holding his hand up near the
spokes to keep them open and this allowed the handle, which was carved to
represent the head of a fox terrier, to jab him every few seconds in the stomach.
He proceeded for another quarter of a block this way before the back half of the
silk stood up off the spokes and allowed the stormto sweep down his collar. Then
he ducked under the marquee of a movie house. It was Saturday and there were a
lot of children standing more or less in a line in front of the ticket box.
Enoch was not very fond of children, but children always seemed to like to
look at him. The line turned and twenty or thirty eyes began to observe him with a
steady interest. The umbrella had assumed an ugly position, half up and half down,
and the half that was up was about to come down and spill more water under his
collar. When this happened the children laughed and jumped up and down. Enoch
glared at them and turned his back and lowered his dark glasses. He found himself
facing a life-size four-color picture of a gorilla. Over the gorilla’s head, written in
red letters was “GONGA! Giant Jungle Monarch and a Great Star! HERE IN
PERSON!!!” At the level of the gorilla’s knee, there was more that said, “Gonga
will appear in person in front of this theater at 12 A.M. TODAY! A free pass to the
first ten brave enough to step up and shake his hand!”
Enoch was usually thinking of something else at the moment that Fate began
drawing back her leg to kick him. When he was four years old, his father had
brought him home a tin box from the penitentiary. It was orange and had a picture
of some peanut brittle on the outside of it and green letters that said, “A NUTTY
SURPRISE!” When Enoch had opened it, a coiled piece of steel had sprung out at
him and broken off the ends of his two front teeth. His life was full of so many
happenings like that that it would seem he should have been more sensitive to his
times of danger. He stood there and read the poster twice through carefully. To his
mind, an opportunity to insult a successful ape came fromthe hand of Providence.
He turned around and asked the nearest child what time it was. The child said
it was twelve-ten and that Gonga was already ten minutes late. Another child said
that maybe the rain had delayed him. Another said, no not the rain, his director
was taking a plane from Hollywood. Enoch gritted his teeth. The first child said
that if he wanted to shake the star’s hand, he would have to get in line like the rest
of them and wait his turn. Enoch got in line. A child asked him how old he was.
Another observed that he had funny-looking teeth. He ignored all this as best he
could and began to straighten out the umbrella.
In a few minutes a black truck turned around the corner and came slowly up
the street in the heavy rain. Enoch pushed the umbrella under his arm and began to
squint through his dark glasses. As the truck approached, a phonograph inside it
began to play “Tarara Boom Di Aye,” but the music was almost drowned out by
the rain. There was a large illustration of a blonde on the outside of the truck,
advertising some picture other than the gorilla’s.
The children held their line carefully as the truck stopped in front of the movie
house. The back door of it was constructed like a paddy wagon, with a grate, but
the ape was not at it. Two men in raincoats got out of the cab part, cursing, and ran
around to the back and opened the door. One of them stuck his head in and said,
“Okay, make it snappy, willya?” The other jerked his thumb at the children and
said, “Get back willya, willya get back?”
A voice on the record inside the truck said, “Here’s Gonga, folks, Roaring
Gonga and a Great Star! Give Gonga a big hand, folks!” The voice was barely a
mumble in the rain.
The man who was waiting by the door of the truck stuck his head in again.
“Okay willya get out?” he said.
There was a faint thump somewhere inside the van. After a second a dark furry
armemerged just enough for the rain to touch it and then drew back inside.
“Goddamn,” the man who was under the marquee said; he took off his raincoat
and threw it to the man by the door, who threw it into the wagon. After two or
three minutes more, the gorilla appeared at the door, with the raincoat buttoned up
to his chin and the collar turned up. There was an iron chain hanging from around
his neck; the man grabbed it and pulled him down and the two of them bounded
under the marquee together. A motherly-looking woman was in the glass ticket
box, getting the passes ready for the first ten children brave enough to step up and
shake hands.
The gorilla ignored the children entirely and followed the man over to the
other side of the entrance where there was a small platform raised about a foot off
the ground. He stepped up on it and turned facing the children and began to growl.
His growls were not so much loud as poisonous; they appeared to issue from a
black heart. Enoch was terrified and if he had not been surrounded by the children,
he would have run away.
“Who’ll step up first?” the man said. “Come on come on, who’ll step up first?
A free pass to the first kid stepping up.”
There was no movement from the group of children. The man glared at them.
“What’s the matter with you kids?” he barked. “You yellow? He won’t hurt you as
long as I got himby this chain.” He tightened his grip on the chain and jangled it at
themto show he was holding it securely.
After a minute a little girl separated herself from the group. She had long
wood-shaving curls and a fierce triangular face. She moved up to within four feet
of the star.
“Okay okay,” the man said, rattling the chain, “make it snappy.”
The ape reached out and gave her hand a quick shake. By this time there was
another little girl ready and then two boys. The line re-formed and began to move
up.
The gorilla kept his hand extended and turned his head away with a bored look
at the rain. Enoch had got over his fear and was trying frantically to think of an
obscene remark that would be suitable to insult him with. Usually he didn’t have
any trouble with this kind of composition but nothing came to him now. His brain,
both parts, was completely empty. He couldn’t think even of the insulting phrases
he used every day.
There were only two children in front of him by now. The first one shook
hands and stepped aside. Enoch’s heart was beating violently. The child in front
of him finished and stepped aside and left him facing the ape, who took his hand
with an automatic motion.
It was the first hand that had been extended to Enoch since he had come to the
city. It was warmand soft.
For a second he only stood there, clasping it. Then he began to stammer. “My
name is Enoch Emery,” he mumbled. “I attended the Rodemill Boys’ Bible
Academy. I work at the city zoo. I seen two of your pictures. I’m only eighteen
years old but I already work for the city. My daddy made me come…” and his
voice cracked.
The star leaned slightly forward and a change came in his eyes: an ugly pair of
human ones moved closer and squinted at Enoch from behind the celluloid pair.
“You go to hell,” a surly voice inside the ape-suit said, low but distinctly, and the
hand was jerked away.
Enoch’s humiliation was so sharp and painful that he turned around three times
before he realized which direction he wanted to go in. Then he ran off into the rain
as fast as he could.

In spite of himself, Enoch couldn’t get over the expectation that something was
going to happen to him. The virtue of hope, in Enoch, was made up of two parts
suspicion and one part lust. It operated on him all the rest of the day. He had only
a vague idea what he wanted, but he was not a boy without ambition: he wanted to
become something. He wanted to better his condition. He wanted, some day, to
see a line of people waiting to shake his hand.
All afternoon he fidgeted and fooled in his room, biting his nails and shredding
what was left of the silk off the landlady’s umbrella. Finally he denuded it entirely
and broke off the spokes. What was left was a black stick with a sharp steel point
at one end and a dog’s head at the other. It might have been an instrument for some
specialized kind of torture that had gone out of fashion. Enoch walked up and
down his room with it under his arm and realized that it would distinguish him on
the sidewalk.
About seven o’clock in the evening he put on his coat and took the stick and
headed for a little restaurant two blocks away. He had the sense that he was
setting off to get some honor, but he was very nervous, as if he were afraid he
might have to snatch it instead of receive it.
He never set out for anything without eating first. The restaurant was called the
Paris Diner; it was a tunnel about six feet wide, located between a shoeshine
parlor and a dry-cleaning establishment. Enoch slid in and climbed up on the far
stool at the counter and said he would have a bowl of split-pea soup and a
chocolate malted milkshake.
The waitress was a tall woman with a big yellow dental plate and the same
color hair done up in a black hairnet. One hand never left her hip; she filled orders
with the other one. Although Enoch came in every night, she had never learned to
like him.
Instead of filling his order, she began to fry bacon; there was only one other
customer in the place and he had finished his meal and was reading a newspaper;
there was no one to eat the bacon but her. Enoch reached over the counter and
prodded her hip with the stick. “Listenhere,” he said, “I got to go. I’min a hurry.”
“Go then,” she said. Her jaw began to work and she stared into the skillet with
a fixed attention.
“Lemme just have a piece of theter cake yonder,” he said, pointing to a half of
pink and yellow cake on a round glass stand. “I think I got something to do. I got to
be going. Set it up there next to him,” he said, indicating the customer reading the
newspaper. He slid over the stools and began reading the outside sheet of the
man’s paper.
The man lowered the paper and looked at him. Enoch smiled. The man raised
the paper again. “Could I borrow some part of your paper that you ain’t studying?”
Enoch asked. The man lowered it again and stared at him; he had muddy
unflinching eyes. He leafed deliberately through the paper and shook out the sheet
with the comic strips and handed it to Enoch. It was Enoch’s favorite part. He
read it every evening like an office. While he ate the cake that the waitress had
torpedoed down the counter at him, he read and felt himself surge with kindness
and courage and strength.
When he finished one side, he turned the sheet over and began to scan the
advertisements for movies that filled the other side. His eye went over three
columns without stopping; then it came to a box that advertised Gonga, Giant
Jungle Monarch, and listed the theaters he would visit on his tour and the hours he
would be at each one. In thirty minutes he would arrive at the Victory on 57th
Street and that would be his last appearance in the city.
If anyone had watched Enoch read this, he would have seen a certain
transformation in his countenance. It still shone with the inspiration he had
absorbed from the comic strips, but something else had come over it: a look of
awakening.
The waitress happened to turn around to see if he hadn’t gone. “What’s the
matter with you?” she said. “Did you swallow a seed?”
“I know what I want,” Enoch murmured.
“I know what I want too,” she said with a dark look.
Enoch felt for his stick and laid his change on the counter. “I got to be going.”
“Don’t let me keep you,” she said.
“You may not see me again,” he said, “—the way I am.”
“Any way I don’t see you will be all right with me,” she said.
Enoch left. It was a pleasant damp evening. The puddles on the sidewalk
shone and the store windows were steamy and bright with junk. He disappeared
down a side street and made his way rapidly along the darker passages of the city,
pausing only once or twice at the end of an alley to dart a glance in each direction
before he ran on. The Victory was a small theater, suited to the needs of the
family, in one of the closer subdivisions; he passed through a succession of lighted
areas and then on through more alleys and back streets until he came to the
business section that surrounded it. Then he slowed up. He saw it about a block
away, glittering in its darker setting. He didn’t cross the street to the side it was on
but kept on the far side, moving forward with his squint fixed on the glary spot. He
stopped when he was directly across from it and hid himself in a narrow stair
cavity that divided a building.
The truck that carried Gonga was parked across the street and the star was
standing under the marquee, shaking hands with an elderly woman. She moved
aside and a gentleman in a polo shirt stepped up and shook hands vigorously, like
a sportsman. He was followed by a boy of about three who wore a tall Western
hat that nearly covered his face; he had to be pushed ahead by the line. Enoch
watched for some time, his face working with envy. The small boy was followed
by a lady in shorts, she by an old man who tried to draw extra attention to himself
by dancing up instead of walking in a dignified way. Enoch suddenly darted
across the street and slipped noiselessly into the open back door of the truck.
The handshaking went on until the feature picture was ready to begin. Then the
star got back in the van and the people filed into the theater. The driver and the
man who was master of ceremonies climbed in the cab part and the truck rumbled
off. It crossed the city rapidly and continued on the highway, going very fast.
There came from the van certain thumping noises, not those of the normal
gorilla, but they were drowned out by the drone of the motor and the steady sound
of wheels against the road. The night was pale and quiet, with nothing to stir it but
an occasional complaint from a hoot owl and the distant muted jarring of a freight
train. The truck sped on until it slowed for a crossing, and as the van rattled over
the tracks, a figure slipped from the door and almost fell, and then limped
hurriedly off toward the woods.
Once in the darkness of a pine thicket, he laid down a pointed stick he had
been clutching and something bulky and loose that he had been carrying under his
arm, and began to undress. He folded each garment neatly after he had taken it off
and then stacked it on top of the last thing he had removed. When all his clothes
were in the pile, he took up the stick and began making a hole in the ground with
it.
The darkness of the pine grove was broken by paler moonlit spots that moved
over himnow and again and showed himto be Enoch. His natural appearance was
marred by a gash that ran from the corner of his lip to his collarbone and by a
lump under his eye that gave him a dulled insensitive look. Nothing could have
been more deceptive for he was burning with the intensest kind of happiness.
He dug rapidly until he had made a trench about a foot long and a foot deep.
Then he placed the stack of clothes in it and stood aside to rest a second. Burying
his clothes was not a symbol to him of burying his former self; he only knew he
wouldn’t need them any more. As soon as he got his breath, he pushed the
displaced dirt over the hole and stamped it down with his foot. He discovered
while he did this that he still had his shoes on, and when he finished, he removed
them and threw them from him. Then he picked up the loose bulky object and
shook it vigorously.
In the uncertain light, one of his lean white legs could be seen to disappear and
then the other, one armand then the other: a black heavier shaggier figure replaced
his. For an instant, it had two heads, one light and one dark, but after a second, it
pulled the dark back head over the other and corrected this. It busied itself with
certain hidden fastenings and what appeared to be minor adjustments of its hide.
For a time after this, it stood very still and didn’t do anything. Then it began to
growl and beat its chest; it jumped up and down and flung its arms and thrust its
head forward. The growls were thin and uncertain at first but they grew louder
after a second. They became low and poisonous, louder again, low and poisonous
again; they stopped altogether. The figure extended its hand, clutched nothing, and
shook its arm vigorously; it withdrew the arm, extended it again, clutched nothing,
and shook. It repeated this four or five times. Then it picked up the pointed stick
and placed it at a cocky angle under its arm and left the woods for the highway.
No gorilla anywhere, Africa or California or New York, was happier than he.
A man and woman sitting close together on a rock just off the highway were
looking across an open stretch of valley at a view of the city in the distance and
they didn’t see the shaggy figure approaching. The smokestacks and square tops of
buildings made a black uneven wall against the lighter sky and here and there a
steeple cut a sharp wedge out of a cloud. The young man turned his neck just in
time to see the gorilla standing a few feet away, hideous and black, with its hand
extended. He eased his arm from around the woman and disappeared silently into
the woods. She, as soon as she turned her eyes, fled screaming down the highway.
The gorilla stood as though surprised and presently its arm fell to its side. It sat
down on the rock where they had been sitting and stared over the valley at the
uneven skyline of the city.