It was one of those nights that made him feel he knew what it was like to
be a blind man; not the shadow of an image for his eyes to discern, not even the
forms of the trees visible against the sky.
Out of the darkness he became aware of small rustling noises in the hedge,
the breathing of a horse some distance away in the field, the soft thud of a hoof
as it moved its foot; and once he heard the rush of a bird flying past him low
overhead.
"Jock," he said, speaking loud. "We'll go home now." And he turned and began
to walk back up the slope of the lane, the dog pulling ahead, showing the way in
the dark.
It must be nearly midnight, he thought. That meant that soon it would be
tomorrow. Tomorrow was worse than today. Tomorrow was the worst of all because it
was going to become today--and today was now.
Today had not been very nice, especially that business with the splinter.
Stop it, he told himself. There isn't any sense thinking about it. It
doesn't do anyone any good thinking about things like that. Think about something
else for a change. You can kick out a dangerous thought, you know, if you put
another in its place. Go right back as far as you can go. Let's have some memories
of sweet days. The seaside holidays in the summer, wet sand and red buckets and
shrimping nets and the slippery seaweedy rocks and the small clear pools and sea
anemones and snails and mussels and sometimes one grey translucent shrimp hovering
deep down in the beautiful green water.
But how could that splinter have got into the sole of his foot without him
feeling it?
It is not important. Do you remember hunting for cowries along the margin of
the tide, each one so fine and perfect it became a precious jewel to be held in
the hand all the way home; and the little orange-coloured scallops, the pearly
oyster shells, the tiny bits of emerald glass, a live hermit crab, a cockle, the
spine of a skate, and once, but never to be forgotten, the dry seawashed jawbone
of a human being with teeth in it, white and wonderful among the shells and
pebbles. Oh Mummy, look what I've found! Look, Mummy, look!
But to go back to the splinter. She had really been rather unpleasant about
that.
"What do you mean, you didn't notice?" she had asked, scornful.
"I just didn't notice, that's all."
"I suppose you're going to tell me if I stick a pin into your foot you won't
feel it?"
"I didn't say that."
And then she had jabbed him suddenly in the ankle with the pin she had been
using to take out the splinter, and he hadn't been watching so he didn't know
about it till she had cried out in a kind of horror. And when he had looked down,
the pin was sticking into the flesh all by itself behind the anklebone, almost
half of it buried. "Take it out," he had said. "You can poison someone like that."
"You mean you can't feel it?"
"Take it out, will you?"
"You mean it doesn't hurt?"
"The pain is terrible. Take it out."
"What's the matter with you?"
"I said the pain is terrible. Didn't you hear me?"
Why did they do things like that to him?
When I was down beside the sea, a wooden spade they gave to me, to dig the
sandy shore. My holes were empty as a cup, and every time the sea came up, till it
could come no more.
A year ago the doctor had said, "Shut your eyes. Now tell me whether I'm
pushing this toe up or down."
"Up," he had said.
"And now?"
"Down. No, up. I think it's up."
It was peculiar that a neuro-surgeon should want to play with his toes.
"Did I get them all right, doctor?"
"You did very well."
But that was a year ago. He had felt pretty good a year ago. The sort of
things that happened now never used to happen then. Take, for example, just one
item--the bathroom tap.
Why was the hot tap in the bathroom on a different side this morning? That
was a new one.
It is not of the least importance, you understand, but it would be
interesting to know why.
Do you think she could have changed it over, taken a spanner and a pipewrench and sneaked in during the night and changed it over?
Do you? Well--if you really want to know--yes. The way she'd been acting
lately, she'd be quite capable of doing that.
A strange and difficult woman, that's what she was. Mind you, she used not
to be, but there's no doubt at all that right now she was as strange and difficult
as they come. Especially at night.
Yes, at night. That was the worst time of all--the night.
Why, when he put out his right hand in bed at night, could his fingers not
feel what they were touching? He had knocked over the lamp and she had woken up
and then sat up suddenly while he was feeling for it on the floor in the dark.
"What are you doing now?"
"I knocked over the lamp. I'm sorry."
"Oh Christ," she had said. "Yesterday it was the glass of water. What's the
matter with you?"
Once, the doctor had stroked the back of his hand with a feather, and he
hadn't been able to feel that either. But he had felt it when the man scratched
him with a pin.
"Shut your eyes. No--you mustn't look. Shut them tight. Now tell me if this
is hot or cold."
"Hot.",, And this?"
"Cold."
"And this?"
"Cold. I mean hot. Yes, it's hot, isn't it?"
"That's right," the doctor had said. "You did very well."
But that was a year ago.
Why were the switches on the walls, just lately, always a few inches away
from the well-remembered places when he felt for them in the dark?
Don't think about it, he told himself. The only thing is not to think about
it.
And while we're on the subject, why did the walls of the living-room take on
a slightly different shade of colour each day?
Green and blue-green and blue; and sometimes--sometimes slowly swimming like
colours seen through the heat-haze of a brazier.
One by one, neatly, like index cards out of a machine, the little questions
dropped.
Whose face appeared for one second at the window during dinner? Whose eyes?
"What are you staring at?"
"Nothing," he had answered. "But it would be nice if we could draw the
curtains, don't you think?
"Robert, what were you staring at?"
"Nothing,"
"Why were you staring at the window like that?"
"It would be nice if we could draw the curtains, don't you think?" he had
answered.
He was going past the place where he had heard the horse in the field and
now he could hear it again; the breathing, the soft hoof thuds, and the crunch of
grass-cropping that was like the noise of a man munching celery.
"Hello old horse," he said, calling loud into the darkness. "Hello old horse
over there."
Suddenly he heard the footsteps behind him, slow, long-striding footsteps
close behind, and he stopped. The footsteps stopped. He turned around, searching
the darkness.
"Good evening," he said, "You here again?"
In the quiet that followed he could hear the wind moving the leaves in the
hedge.
"Are you going my way?" he said.
Then he turned and walked on, the dog still pulling ahead, and the footsteps
started after him again, but more softly now, as though the person were walking on
toes.
He stopped and turned again.
"I can't see you," he said, "because it's so dark. Are you someone I know?"
Again the silence, and the cool summer wind on his cheeks, and the dog
tugging on the leash to get home.
"All right," he called. "You don't have to answer if you don't want to. But
remember I know you're there."
Someone trying to be clever.
Far away in the night, over to the west and very high, he heard the faint
hum of an aeroplane. He stopped again, head up, listening.
"Miles away," he said. "Won't come near here." But why, when one of them
flew over the house, did everything inside him come to a stop, and his talking and
what he was doing, while he sat or stood in a sort of paralysis waiting for the
whistle-shriek of the bomb. That one after dinner this evening.
"Why did you duck like that?" she asked, "Duck?"
"Why did you duck? What are you ducking for?"
"Duck?" he had said again. "I don't know what you mean."
"I'll say you don't," she had answered, staring at him hard with those hard,
blue-white eyes, the lids dropping slightly, as always when there was contempt.
The drop of her eyelids was something beautiful to him, the half-closed eyes and
the way the lids dropped and the eyes became hooded when her contempt was extreme.
Yesterday, lying in bed in the early morning, when the noise of gunfire was
just beginning far away down the valley, he had reached out with his left hand and
touched her body for a little comfort.
"What on earth are you doing?"
"Nothing, dear."
"You woke me up." m sorry."
It would be a help if she would only let him lie closer to her in the early
mornings when he began to hear the noise of gunfire.
He would soon be home now. Around the last bend of the lane he could see a
light glowing pink through the curtain of the living-room window, and he hurried
forward to the gate and through it and up the path to the front door, the dog
still pulling ahead.
He stood on the porch, feeling around for the door-knob in the dark.
It was on the right when he went out. He distinctly remembered it being on
the right-hand side when he shut the door half an hour ago and went out.
It couldn't be that she had changed that over too? Just to fox him? Taken a
bag of tools and quickly changed it over to the other side while he was out
walking the dog?
He moved his hand over to the left--and the moment the fingers touched the
knob, something small but violent exploded inside his head and with it a surge of
fury and outrage and fear. He opened the door, shut it quickly behind him and
shouted "Edna, are you there?"
There was no answer so he shouted again, and this time she heard him.
"What do you want now? You woke me up."
"Come down here a moment, will you. I want to talk to you."
"Oh for heaven's sake," she answered. "Be quiet and come on up."
"Come here!" he shouted. "Come here at once!"
"I'll be damned if I will. You come here."
The man paused, head back, looking up the stairs into the dark of the second
floor. He could see where the stair-rail curved to the left and went on up out of
sight in the black towards the landing and if you went straight on across the
landing you came to the bedroom, and it would be black in there too.
"Edna!" he shouted. "Edna!"
"Oh go to hell."
He began to move slowly up the stairs, treading quietly, touching the stairrail for guidance, up and around the lefthand curve into the dark above. At the
top he took an extra step that wasn't there; but he was ready for it and there was
no noise. He paused awhile then, listening, and he wasn't sure, but he thought he
could hear the guns starting up again far away down the valley, heavy stuff
mostly, seventy-fives and maybe a couple of mortars somewhere in the background.
Across the landing now and through the open doorway--which was easy in the
dark because he knew it so well--through on to the bedroom carpet that was thick
and soft and pale grey although he could not feel or see it.
In the centre of the room he waited, listening for sounds. She had gone back
to sleep and was breathing rather loud, making the slightest little whistle with
the air between her teeth each time she exhaled. The curtain flapped gently
against the open window, the alarm-clock tick-tick-ticked beside the bed.
Now that his eyes were becoming accustomed to the dark he could just make
out the end of the bed, the white blanket tucked in under the mattress, the bulge
of her feet under the bedclothes; and then, as though aware of the presence of the
man in the room, the woman stirred. He heard her turn, and turn again. The sound
of her breathing stopped. There was a succession of little movement-noises and
once the bedsprings creaked, loud as a shout in the dark.
"Is that you, Robert?"
He made no move, no sound.
"Robert, are you there?"
The voice was strange and rather unpleasant to him.
"Robert!" She was wide awake now. "Where are you?"
Where had he heard that voice before? It had a quality of stridence,
dissonance, like two single high notes struck together hard in discord. Also there
was an inability to pronounce the R of Robert. Who was it that used to say Wobert
to him?
"Wobert," she said again. "What are you doing?"
Was it that nurse in the hospital, the tall one with fair hair? No, it was
further back. Such an awful voice as that he ought to remember. Give him a little
time and he would get the name.
At that moment he heard the snap of the switch of the bedside lamp and in
the flood of light he saw the woman half-sitting up in bed, dressed in some sort
of a pink nightdress. There was a surprised, wide-eyed expression on her face. Her
cheeks and chin were oily with cold cream.
"You better put that thing down," she was saying, "before you cut yourself."
"Where's Edna?" He was staring at her hard.
The woman, half-sitting up in bed, watched him carefully. He was standing at
the foot of the bed, a huge, broad man, standing motionless, erect, with heels
together, almost at attention, dressed in his dark-brown, woolly, heavy suit.
"Go on," she ordered. "Put it down."
"Where's Edna?"
"What's the matter with you, Wobert?"
"There's nothing the matter with me. I'm just asking you where's my wife?"
The woman was easing herself up gradually into an erect sitting position and
sliding her legs towards the edge of the bed. "Well," she said at length, the
voice changing, the hard blue-white eyes secret and cunning, "if you really want
to know, Edna's gone. She left just now while you were out."
"Where did she go?"
"She didn't say."
"And who are you?"
"I'm just a friend of hers."
"You don't have to shout at me," he said. "What's all the excitement?"
"I simply want you to know I'm not Edna."
The man considered this a moment, then he said, "How did you know my name?"
"Edna told me." slightly he paused, studying her closely, still Slightly
puzzled, but much calmer now, his eyes calm, perhaps even a little amused the way
they looked at her. "I think I prefer Edna."
In the silence that followed they neither of them moved. The woman was very
tense, sitting up straight with her arms tense on either side of her and slightly
bent at the elbows, the hands pressing palms downward on the mattress.
"I love Edna, you know. Did she ever tell you I love her?"
The woman didn't answer.
"I think she's a bitch. But it's a funny thing I love her just the same."
The woman was not looking at the man's face; she was watching his right
hand.
"Awful cruel little bitch, Edna."
And a long silence now, the man standing erect, motionless, the woman
sitting motionless in the bed, and it was so quiet suddenly that through the open
window they could hear the water in the millstream going over the dam far down the
valley on the next farm.
Then the man again, speaking calmly, slowly, quite impersonally: "As a
matter of fact, I don't think she even likes me any more."
The woman shifted closer to the edge of the bed. "Put that knife down," she
said, "before you cut yourself."
"Don't shout, please. Can't you talk nicely?" Now, suddenly, the man leaned
forward, staring intently into the woman's face, and he raised his eyebrows.
"That's strange," he said. "That's very strange."
He took a step forward, his knees touching the bed. "You look a bit like
Edna yourself."
"Edna's gone out. I told you that."
He continued to stare at her and the woman kept quite still, the palms of
her hands pressing deep into the mattress.
"Well," he said. "I wonder."
"I told you Edna's gone out. I'm a friend of hers. My name is Mary."
"My wife," the man said, "has a funny little brown mole just behind her left
ear. You don't have that, do you?"
"I certainly don't."
"Turn your head and let me look."
"I told you I didn't have it."
"Just the same, I'd like to make sure."
The man came slowly around the end of the bed. "Stay where you are," he
said. "Please don't move." And he came towards her slowly, watching her all the
time, a little smile touching the corners of his mouth.
The woman waited until he was within reach, and then, with a quick right
hand, so quick he never saw it coming, she smacked him hard across the front of
the face. And when he sat down on the bed and began to cry, she took the knife
from his hand and went swiftly out of the room, down the stairs to the hail, where
the telephone was.