It was the middle of August and Myers was between lives.
The only thing different about this time from the other
times was that this time he was sober. He’d just spent twentyeight days at a drying-out facility. But during this period his
wife took it into her head to go down the road with another
drunk, a friend of theirs. The man had recently come into
some money and had been talking about buying into a bar and
restaurant in the eastern part of the state.
Myers called his wife, but she hung up on him. She wouldn’t
even talk to him, let alone have him anywhere near the house.
She had a lawyer and a restraining order. So he took a few
things, boarded a bus, and went to live near the ocean in a
room in a house owned by a man named Sol who had run an
ad in the paper.
Sol was wearing jeans and a red T-shirt when he opened the
door. It was about ten o’clock at night and Myers had just gotten out of a cab. Under the porch light Myers could see that
Sol’s right arm was shorter than his other arm, and the hand
and fingers were withered. He didn’t offer either his good left
hand or his withered hand for Myers to shake, and this was fine
with Myers. Myers felt plenty rattled as it was.
You just called, right? Sol said. You’re here to see the room.
Come on in.
Myers gripped his suitcase and stepped inside.
This is my wife. This is Bonnie, Sol said.
Bonnie was watching TV but moved her eyes to see who it
was coming inside. She pushed the button on a device she held
in her hand and the volume went off. She pushed it again and
the picture disappeared. Then she got up off the sofa onto her
feet. She was a fat girl. She was fat all over and she huffed
when she breathed.
I’m sorry it’s so late, Myers said. Nice to meet you.
It’s all right, Bonnie said. Did my husband tell you on the
phone what we’re asking?
Myers nodded. He was still holding the suitcase.
Well, this is the living room, Sol said, as you can see for
yourself. He shook his head and brought the fingers of his
good hand up to his chin. I may as well tell you that we’re new
at this. We never rented a room to anybody before. But it’s
just back there not being used, and we thought what the hell.
A person can always use a little extra.
I don’t blame you a bit, Myers said.
Where are you from? Bonnie said. You’re not from anywhere around town.
My wife wants to be a writer, Sol said. Who, what, where,
why, and how much?
I just got here, Myers said. He moved the suitcase to his
other hand. I got off the bus about an hour ago, read your ad
in the paper, and called up.
What sort of work do you do? Bonnie wanted to know.
I’ve done everything, Myers said. He set the suitcase down
and opened and closed his fingers. Then he picked up the suitcase again.
Bonnie didn’t pursue it. Sol didn’t either, though Myers
could see he was curious.
Myers took in a photograph of Elvis Presley on top of the
TV. Elvis’s signature ran across the breast of his white sequined jacket. He moved a step closer.
The King, Bonnie said.
Myers nodded but didn’t say anything. Alongside the picture of Elvis was a wedding picture of Sol and Bonnie. In the
picture Sol was dressed up in a suit and tie. Sol’s good strong
left arm reached around Bonnie’s waist as far as it would go.
Sol’s right hand and Bonnie’s right hand were joined over
Sol’s belt buckle. Bonnie wasn’t going anywhere if Sol had
anything to say about it. Bonnie didn’t mind. In the picture
Bonnie wore a hat and was all smiles.
I love her, Sol said, as if Myers had said something to the
contrary.
How about that room you were going to show me? Myers
said.
I knew there was something we were forgetting, Sol said.
They moved out of the living room into the kitchen, Sol
first, then Myers, carrying his suitcase, and then Bonnie. They
passed through the kitchen and turned left just before the back
door. There were some open cupboards along the wall, and a
washer and dryer. Sol opened a door at the end of the little
corridor and turned on the light in the bathroom.
Bonnie moved up and huffed and said, This is your private
bathroom. That door in the kitchen is your own entrance.
Sol opened the door to the other side of the bathroom and
turned on another light. This is the room, he said.
I made up the bed with clean sheets, Bonnie said. But if you
take the room you’ll have to be responsible from here on out.
Like my wife says, this is not a hotel, Sol said. But you’re
welcome, if you want to stay.
There was a double bed against one wall, along with a
nightstand and lamp, a chest of drawers, and a pinochle table
with a metal chair. A big window gave out onto the backyard.
Myers put his suitcase on the bed and moved to the window.
He raised the shade and looked out. A moon rode high in the
sky. In the distance he could see a forested valley and mountain peaks. Was it his imagination, or did he hear a stream or a
river?
I hear water, Myers said.
That’s the Little Quilcene River you hear, Sol said. That river
has the fastest per-foot drop to it of any river in the country.
Well, what do you think? Bonnie said. She went over and
turned down the covers on the bed, and this simple gesture
almost caused Myers to weep.
I’ll take it, Myers said.
I’m glad, Sol said. My wife’s glad too, I can tell. I’ll have
them pull that ad out of the paper tomorrow. You want to
move in right now, don’t you?
That’s what I hoped, Myers said.
We’ll let you get settled, Bonnie said. I gave you two pillows, and there’s an extra quilt in that closet.
Myers could only nod.
Well, good night, Sol said.
Good night, Bonnie said.
Good night, Myers said. And thank you.
Sol and Bonnie went through his bathroom and into the
kitchen. They closed the door, but not before Myers heard
Bonnie say, He seems okay.
Pretty quiet, Sol said.
I think I’ll fix buttered popcorn.
I’ll eat some with you, Sol said.
Pretty soon Myers heard the TV come on again in the living
room, but it was a very faint sound and he didn’t think it
would bother him. He opened the window all the way and
heard the sound of the river as it raced through the valley on
its way to the ocean.
He took his things out of the suitcase and put them away in
the drawers. Then he used the bathroom and brushed his
teeth. He moved the table so that it sat directly in front of the
window. Then he looked at where she’d turned the covers
down. He drew out the metal chair and sat down and took a
ballpoint out of his pocket. He thought for a minute, then
opened the notebook, and at the top of a blank white page he
wrote the words Emptiness is the beginning of all things. He
stared at this, and then he laughed. Jesus, what rubbish! He
shook his head. He closed the notebook, undressed, and
turned off the light. He stood for a moment looking out the
window and listening to the river. Then he moved to get into
bed.
Bonnie fixed the popcorn, salted it and poured butter over it,
and took it in a big bowl to where Sol was watching TV. She
let him help himself to some first. He used his left hand to
good effect and then he reached his little hand over for the
paper towel she offered. She took a little popcorn for herself.
What do you make of him? she wanted to know. Our new
roomer.
Sol shook his head and went on watching TV and eating
popcorn. Then, as if he’d been thinking about her question,
he said, I like him all right. He’s okay. But I think he’s on the
run from something.
What?
I don’t know that. I’m just guessing. He isn’t dangerous
and he isn’t going to make any trouble.
His eyes, Bonnie said.
What about his eyes?
They’re sad eyes. Saddest eyes I ever saw on a man.
Sol didn’t say anything for a minute. He finished his popcorn. He wiped his fingers and dabbed his chin with the paper
towel. He’s okay. He’s just had some trouble along the way,
that’s all. No disgrace attached to that. Give me a sip of that,
will you? He reached over for the glass of orange drink she was
holding and took some. You know, I forgot to collect the rent
from him tonight. I’ll have to get it in the morning, if he’s up.
And I should have asked him how long he intends to stay.
Damn, what’s wrong with me? I don’t want to turn this place
into a hotel.
You couldn’t think of everything. Besides, we’re new at this.
We never rented a room out before.
Bonnie decided she was going to write about the man in the
notebook she was filling up. She closed her eyes and thought
about what she was going to write. This tall, stooped—but
handsome!—curly headed stranger with sad eyes walked into our
house one fateful night in August. She leaned into Sol’s left arm
and tried to write some more. Sol squeezed her shoulder,
which brought her back to the present. She opened her eyes
and closed them, but she couldn’t think of anything else to
write about him at the moment. Time will tell, she thought.
She was glad he was here.
This show’s for the birds, Sol said. Let’s go to bed. We have
to get up in the morning.
In bed, Sol loved her up and she took him and held him and
loved him back, but all the time she was doing it she was
thinking about the big, curly headed man in the back room.
What if he suddenly opened the bedroom door and looked in
on them?
Sol, she said, is this bedroom door locked?
What? Be still, Sol said. Then he finished and rolled off, but
he kept his little arm on her breast. She lay on her back and
thought for a minute, then she patted his fingers, let air out
through her mouth, and went off to sleep thinking about
blasting caps, which is what had gone off in Sol’s hand when
he was a teenager, severing nerves and causing his arm and fingers to wither.
Bonnie began to snore. Sol took her arm and shook it until
she turned over on her side, away from him.
In a minute, he got up and put on his underwear. He went
into the living room. He didn’t turn on the light. He didn’t
need a light. The moon was out, and he didn’t want a light.
He went from the living room into the kitchen. He made sure
the back door was locked, and then he stood for a while outside the bathroom door listening, but he couldn’t hear anything out of the ordinary. The faucet dripped—it needed a
washer, but then, it had always dripped. He went back
through the house and closed and locked their bedroom door.
He checked the clock and made sure the stem was pulled. He
got into bed and moved right up against Bonnie. He put his
leg over her leg, and in that way he finally went to sleep.
These three people slept and dreamed, while outside the house
the moon grew large, and seemed to move across the sky until
it was out over the ocean and growing smaller and paler. In his
dream, someone is offering Myers a glass of Scotch, but just as
he is about to take it, reluctantly, he wakes up in a sweat, his
heart racing.
Sol dreams that he is changing a tire on a truck and that he
has the use of both of his arms.
Bonnie dreams she is taking two—no, three—children to
the park. She even has names for the children. She named
them just before the trip to the park. Millicent, Dionne, and
Randy. Randy keeps wanting to pull away from her and go his
own way.
Soon, the sun breaks over the horizon and birds begin calling
to each other. The Little Quilcene River rushes down through
the valley, shoots under the highway bridge, rushes another
hundred yards over sand and sharp rocks, and pours into the
ocean. An eagle flies down from the valley and over the bridge
and begins to pass up and down the beach. A dog barks.
At this minute, Sol’s alarm goes off.
Myers stayed in his room that morning until he heard them
leave. Then he went out and made instant coffee. He looked
in the fridge and saw that one of the shelves had been cleared
for him. A little sign was Scotch-taped to it: mr. myers shelf.
Later, he walked a mile toward town to a little service station he remembered from the night before that also sold a few
groceries. He bought milk, cheese, bread, and tomatoes. That
afternoon, before it was time for them to come home, he left
the rent money in cash on the table and went back into his
own room. Late that night, before going to bed, he opened
his notebook and on a clean page he wrote, Nothing.
He adjusted his schedule to theirs. Mornings he’d stay in
the room until he heard Sol in the kitchen making coffee and
getting his breakfast. Then he would hear Sol calling Bonnie
to get up and then they’d have breakfast, but they wouldn’t
talk much. Then Sol would go out to the garage and start the
pickup, back out, and drive away. In a little while, Bonnie’s
ride would pull up in front of the house, a horn would toot,
and Bonnie would say, every time, I’m coming.
It was then that Myers would go out to the kitchen, put on
water for coffee, and eat a bowl of cereal. But he didn’t have
much of an appetite. The cereal and coffee would keep him for
most of the day, until the afternoon, when he’d eat something
else, a sandwich, before they arrived home, and then he’d stay
out of the kitchen for the rest of the time when they might be
in there or in the living room watching TV. He didn’t want
any conversation.
She’d go into the kitchen for a snack the first thing after she
got in from work. Then she’d turn on the TV and wait until
Sol came in, and then she’d get up and fix something for the
two of them to eat. They might talk on the telephone to
friends, or else go sit outside in the backyard between the
garage and Myers’s bedroom window and talk about their day
and drink iced tea until it was time to go inside and turn on
the TV. Once he heard Bonnie say to someone on the telephone, How’d she expect me to pay any attention to Elvis
Presley’s weight when my own weight was out of control at
the time?
They’d said he was welcome anytime to sit in the living
room with them and watch TV. He’d thanked them but said,
No, television hurt his eyes.
They were curious about him. Especially Bonnie, who’d
asked him one day when she came home early and surprised
him in the kitchen, if he’d been married and if he had any kids.
Myers nodded. Bonnie looked at him and waited for him to go
on, but he didn’t.
Sol was curious too. What kind of work do you do? he
wanted to know. I’m just curious. This is a small town and I
know people. I grade lumber at the mill myself. Only need one
good arm to do that. But sometimes there are openings. I
could put in a word, maybe. What’s your regular line of work?
Do you play any instruments? Bonnie asked. Sol has a guitar, she said.
I don’t know how to play it, Sol said. I wish I did.
Myers kept to his room, where he was writing a letter to his
wife. It was a long letter and, he felt, an important one. Perhaps the most important letter he’d ever written in his life. In
the letter he was attempting to tell his wife that he was sorry
for everything that had happened and that he hoped someday
she would forgive him. I would get down on my knees and ask
forgiveness if that would help.
After Sol and Bonnie both left, he sat in the living room
with his feet on the coffee table and drank instant coffee while
he read the newspaper from the evening before. Once in a
while his hands trembled and the newspaper began rattling in
the empty house. Now and then the telephone rang, but he
never made a move to answer it. It wasn’t for him, because nobody knew he was here.
Through his window at the rear of the house he could see
up the valley to a series of steep mountain peaks whose tops
were covered with snow, even though it was August. Lower
down on the mountains, timber covered the slopes and the
sides of the valley. The river coursed down the valley, frothing
and boiling over rocks and under granite embankments until it
burst out of its confines at the mouth of the valley, slowed a
little, as if it had spent itself, then picked up strength again and
plunged into the ocean. When Sol and Bonnie were gone,
Myers often sat in the sun in a lawn chair out back and looked
up the valley toward the peaks. Once he saw an eagle soaring
down the valley, and on another occasion he saw a deer picking
its way along the riverbank.
He was sitting out there like that one afternoon when a big
flatbed truck pulled up in the drive with a load of wood.
You must be Sol’s roomer, the man said, talking out the
truck window.
Myers nodded.
Sol said to just dump this wood in the backyard and he’d
take care of it from there.
I’ll move out of your way, Myers said. He took the chair and
moved to the back step, where he stood and watched the
driver back the truck up onto the lawn, then push something
inside the cab until the truck bed began to elevate. In a
minute, the six-foot logs began to slide off the truck bed and
pile up on the ground. The bed rose even higher, and all of the
chunks rolled off with a loud bang onto the lawn.
The driver touched the lever again and the truck bed went
back to its normal place. Then he revved his engine, honked,
and drove away.
What are you going to do with that wood out there? Myers
asked Sol that night. Sol was standing at the stove frying smelt
when Myers surprised him by coming into the kitchen. Bonnie
was in the shower. Myers could hear the water running.
Why, I’m going to saw it up and stack it, if I can find the
time between now and September. I’d like to do it before the
rain starts.
Maybe I could do it for you, Myers said.
You ever cut wood before? Sol said. He’d taken the frying
pan off the stove and was wiping the fingers of his left hand
with a paper towel. I couldn’t pay you anything for doing it.
It’s something I was going to do anyway. Just as soon as I get
a weekend to my name.
I’ll do it, Myers said. I can use the exercise.
You know how to use a power saw? And an ax and a maul?
You can show me, Myers said. I learn fast. It was important
to him that he cut the wood.
Sol put the pan of smelt back on the burner. Then he said,
Okay, I’ll show you after supper. You had anything to eat yet?
Why don’t you have a bite to eat with us?
I ate something already, Myers said.
Sol nodded. Let me get this grub on the table for Bonnie
and me, then, and after we eat I’ll show you.
I’ll be out back, Myers said.
Sol didn’t say anything more. He nodded to himself, as if he
was thinking about something else.
Myers took one of the folding chairs and sat down on it and
looked at the pile of wood and then up the valley at the mountains where the sun was shining off the snow. It was nearly
evening. The peaksthrust up into some clouds, and mistseemed
to be falling from them. He could hear the river crashing
through the undergrowth down in the valley.
I heard talking, Myers heard Bonnie say to Sol in the
kitchen.
It’s the roomer, Sol said. He asked me if he could cut up
that load of wood out back.
How much does he want to do it? Bonnie wanted to know.
Did you tell him we can’t pay much?
I told him we can’t pay anything. He wants to do it for
nothing. That’s what he said, anyway.
Nothing? She didn’t say anything for a time. Then Myers
heard her say, I guess he doesn’t have anything else to do.
Later, Sol came outside and said, I guess we can get started
now, if you’re still game.
Myers got up out of the lawn chair and followed Sol over to
the garage. Sol brought out two sawhorses and set them up on
the lawn. Then he brought out a power saw. The sun had
dropped behind the town. In another thirty minutes it would
be dark. Myers rolled down the sleeves of his shirt and buttoned the cuffs. Sol worked without saying anything. He
grunted as he lifted one of the six-foot logs and positioned it
on the sawhorses. Then he began to use the saw, working
steadily for a while. Sawdust flew. Finally he stopped sawing
and stepped back.
You get the idea, he said.
Myers took the saw, nosed the blade into the cut Sol had
started, then began sawing. He found a rhythm and stayed
with it. He kept pressing, leaning into the saw. In a few minutes, he sawed through and the two halves of the log dropped
onto the ground.
That’s the idea, Sol said. You’ll do, he said. He picked up
the two blocks of wood and carried them over and put them
alongside the garage.
Every so often—not every piece of wood, but maybe every
fifth or sixth piece—you’ll want to split it with the ax down the
middle. Don’t worry about making kindling. I’ll take care of
that later. Just split about every fifth or sixth chunk you have.
I’ll show you. And he propped the chunk up and, with a blow
of the ax, split the wood into two pieces. You try it now, he
said.
Myers stood the block on its end, just as Sol had done, and
he brought the ax down and split the wood.
That’s good, Sol said. He put the chunks of wood by the
garage. Stack them up about so high, and then come out this
way with your stack. I’ll lay some plastic sheeting over it once
it’s all finished. But you don’t have to do this, you know.
It’s all right, Myers said. I want to, or I wouldn’t have asked.
Sol shrugged. Then he turned and went back to the house.
Bonnie was standing in the doorway, watching, and Sol
stopped and reached his arm around Bonnie, and they both
looked at Myers.
Myers picked up the saw and looked at them. He felt good
suddenly, and he grinned. Sol and Bonnie were taken by surprise at first. Sol grinned back, and then Bonnie. Then they
went back inside.
Myers put another piece of wood on the sawhorses and
worked awhile, sawing, until the sweat on his forehead began
to feel chill and the sun had gone down. The porch light came
on. Myers kept on working until he’d finished the piece he was
on. He carried the two pieces over to the garage and then he
went in, used his bathroom to wash up, then sat at the table in
his room and wrote in his notebook. I have sawdust in my
shirtsleeves tonight, he wrote. It’s a sweet smell.
That night he lay awake for a long time. Once he got out of
bed and looked out the window at the mound of wood which
lay in the backyard, and then his eyes were drawn up the valley
to the mountains. The moon was partially obscured by clouds,
but he could see the peaks and the white snow, and when he
raised his window the sweet, cool air poured in, and farther off
he could hear the river coursing down the valley.
The next morning it was all he could do to wait until they’d
left the house before he went out back to begin work. He
found a pair of gloves on the back step that Sol must have left
for him. He sawed and split wood until the sun stood directly
over his head and then he went inside and ate a sandwich and
drank some milk. Then he went back outside and began again.
His shoulders hurt and his fingers were sore and, in spite of
the gloves, he’d picked up a few splinters and could feel blisters rising, but he kept on. He decided that he would cut this
wood and split it and stack it before sunset, and that it was a
matter of life and death that he do so. I must finish this job, he
thought, or else ... He stopped to wipe his sleeve over his
face.
By the time Sol and Bonnie came in from work that night—
first Bonnie, as usual, and then Sol—Myers was nearly through.
A thick pile of sawdust lay between the sawhorses, and, except
for two or three blocks still in the yard, all of the wood lay
stacked in tiers against the garage. Sol and Bonnie stood in the
doorway without saying anything. Myers looked up from his
work for a minute and nodded, and Sol nodded back. Bonnie
just stood there looking, breathing through her mouth. Myers
kept on.
Sol and Bonnie went back inside and began on their supper.
Afterward, Sol turned on the porch light, as he’d done the
evening before. Just as the sun went down and the moon appeared over the mountains, Myers split the last chunk and
gathered up the two pieces and carried the wood over to the
garage. He put away the sawhorses, the saw, the ax, a wedge,
and the maul. Then he went inside.
Sol and Bonnie sat at the table, but they hadn’t begun on
their food.
You better sit down and eat with us, Sol said.
Sit down, Bonnie said.
Not hungry just yet, Myers said.
Sol didn’t say anything. He nodded. Bonnie waited a
minute and then reached for a platter.
You got it all, I’ll bet, Sol said.
Myers said, I’ll clean up that sawdust tomorrow.
Sol moved his knife back and forth over his plate as if to say,
Forget it.
I’ll be leaving in a day or two, Myers said.
Somehow I figured you would be, Sol said. I don’t know
why I felt that, but I didn’t think somehow when you moved
in you’d be here all that long.
No refunds on the rent, Bonnie said.
Hey, Bonnie, Sol said.
It’s okay, Myers said.
No it isn’t, Sol said.
It’s all right, Myers said. He opened the door to the bathroom, stepped inside, and shut the door. As he ran water into
the sink he could hear them talking out there, but he couldn’t
hear what they were saying.
He showered, washed his hair, and put on clean clothes. He
looked at the things of his in the room that had come out of
his suitcase just a few days ago, a week ago, and figured it
would take him about ten minutes to pack up and be gone. He
could hear the TV start up on the other side of the house. He
went to the window and raised it and looked again at the mountains, with the moon lying over them—no clouds now, just the
moon, and the snowcapped mountains. He looked at the pile
of sawdust out in back and at the wood stacked against the
shadowy recesses of the garage. He listened to the river for a
while. Then he went over to the table and sat down and
opened the notebook and began to write.
The country I’m in is very exotic. It reminds me of someplace
I’ve read about but never traveled to before now. Outside my
window I can hear a river and in the valley behind the house
there is a forest and precipices and mountain peaks covered with
snow. Today I saw a wild eagle, and a deer, and I cut and
chopped two cords of wood.
Then he put the pen down and held his head in his hands
for a moment. Pretty soon he got up and undressed and
turned off the light. He left the window open when he got
into bed. It was okay like that.