THE GRANDMOTHER didn’t want to go to Florida. She wanted to visit some of her
connections in east Tennessee and she was seizing at every chance to change
Bailey’s mind. Bailey was the son she lived with, her only boy. He was sitting on
the edge of his chair at the table, bent over the orange sports section of the
Journal. “Now look here, Bailey,” she said, “see here, read this,” and she stood
with one hand on her thin hip and the other rattling the newspaper at his bald head.
“Here this fellow that calls himself The Misfit is aloose from the Federal Pen and
headed toward Florida and you read here what it says he did to these people. Just
you read it. I wouldn’t take my children in any direction with a criminal like that
aloose in it. I couldn’t answer to my conscience if I did.”
Bailey didn’t look up from his reading so she wheeled around then and faced
the children’s mother, a young woman in slacks, whose face was as broad and
innocent as a cabbage and was tied around with a green head-kerchief that had
two points on the top like a rabbit’s ears. She was sitting on the sofa, feeding the
baby his apricots out of a jar. “The children have been to Florida before,” the old
lady said. “You all ought to take them somewhere else for a change so they would
see different parts of the world and be broad. They never have been to east
Tennessee.”
The children’s mother didn’t seem to hear her but the eight-year-old boy, John
Wesley, a stocky child with glasses, said, “If you don’t want to go to Florida, why
dontcha stay at home?” He and the little girl, June Star, were reading the funny
papers on the floor.
“She wouldn’t stay at home to be queen for a day,” June Star said without
raising her yellow head.
“Yes and what would you do if this fellow, The Misfit, caught you?” the
grandmother asked.
“I’d smack his face,” John Wesley said.
“She wouldn’t stay at home for a million bucks,” June Star said. “Afraid she’d
miss something. She has to go everywhere we go.”
“All right, Miss,” the grandmother said. “Just remember that the next time you
want me to curl your hair.”
June Star said her hair was naturally curly.
The next morning the grandmother was the first one in the car, ready to go. She
had her big black valise that looked like the head of a hippopotamus in one corner,
and underneath it she was hiding a basket with Pitty Sing, the cat, in it. She didn’t
intend for the cat to be left alone in the house for three days because he would
miss her too much and she was afraid he might brush against one of the gas
burners and accidentally asphyxiate himself. Her son, Bailey, didn’t like to arrive
at a motel with a cat.
She sat in the middle of the back seat with John Wesley and June Star on either
side of her. Bailey and the children’s mother and the baby sat in front and they left
Atlanta at eight forty-five with the mileage on the car at 55890. The grandmother
wrote this down because she thought it would be interesting to say how many
miles they had been when they got back. It took them twenty minutes to reach the
outskirts of the city.
The old lady settled herself comfortably, removing her white cotton gloves
and putting them up with her purse on the shelf in front of the back window. The
children’s mother still had on slacks and still had her head tied up in a green
kerchief, but the grandmother had on a navy blue straw sailor hat with a bunch of
white violets on the brimand a navy blue dress with a small white dot in the print.
Her collars and cuffs were white organdy trimmed with lace and at her neckline
she had pinned a purple spray of cloth violets containing a sachet. In case of an
accident, anyone seeing her dead on the highway would know at once that she was
a lady.
She said she thought it was going to be a good day for driving, neither too hot
nor too cold, and she cautioned Bailey that the speed limit was fifty-five miles an
hour and that the patrolmen hid themselves behind billboards and small clumps of
trees and sped out after you before you had a chance to slow down. She pointed
out interesting details of the scenery: Stone Mountain; the blue granite that in some
places came up to both sides of the highway; the brilliant red clay banks slightly
streaked with purple; and the various crops that made rows of green lace-work on
the ground. The trees were full of silver-white sunlight and the meanest of them
sparkled. The children were reading comic magazines and their mother had gone
back to sleep.
“Let’s go through Georgia fast so we won’t have to look at it much,” John
Wesley said.
“If I were a little boy,” said the grandmother, “I wouldn’t talk about my native
state that way. Tennessee has the mountains and Georgia has the hills.”
“Tennessee is just a hillbilly dumping ground,” John Wesley said, “and
Georgia is a lousy state too.”
“You said it,” June Star said.
“In my time,” said the grandmother, folding her thin veined fingers, “children
were more respectful of their native states and their parents and everything else.
People did right then. Oh look at the cute little pickaninny!” she said and pointed
to a Negro child standing in the door of a shack. “Wouldn’t that make a picture,
now?” she asked and they all turned and looked at the little Negro out of the back
window. He waved.
“He didn’t have any britches on,” June Star said.
“He probably didn’t have any,” the grandmother explained. “Little niggers in
the country don’t have things like we do. If I could paint, I’d paint that picture,”
she said.
The children exchanged comic books.
The grandmother offered to hold the baby and the children’s mother passed
him over the front seat to her. She set him on her knee and bounced him and told
him about the things they were passing. She rolled her eyes and screwed up her
mouth and stuck her leathery thin face into his smooth bland one. Occasionally he
gave her a faraway smile. They passed a large cotton field with five or six graves
fenced in the middle of it, like a small island. “Look at the graveyard!” the
grandmother said, pointing it out. “That was the old family burying ground. That
belonged to the plantation.”
“Where’s the plantation?” John Wesley asked.
“Gone With the Wind,” said the grandmother. “Ha. Ha.”
When the children finished all the comic books they had brought, they opened
the lunch and ate it. The grandmother ate a peanut butter sandwich and an olive
and would not let the children throw the box and the paper napkins out the
window. When there was nothing else to do they played a game by choosing a
cloud and making the other two guess what shape it suggested. John Wesley took
one the shape of a cow and June Star guessed a cow and John Wesley said, no, an
automobile, and June Star said he didn’t play fair, and they began to slap each
other over the grandmother.
The grandmother said she would tell them a story if they would keep quiet.
When she told a story, she rolled her eyes and waved her head and was very
dramatic. She said once when she was a maiden lady she had been courted by a
Mr. Edgar Atkins Tea-garden from Jasper, Georgia. She said he was a very goodlooking man and a gentleman and that he brought her a watermelon every Saturday
afternoon with his initials cut in it, E. A. T. Well, one Saturday, she said, Mr.
Teagarden brought the watermelon and there was nobody at home and he left it on
the front porch and returned in his buggy to Jasper, but she never got the
watermelon, she said, because a nigger boy ate it when he saw the initials, E. A.
T.! This story tickled John Wesley’s funny bone and he giggled and giggled but
June Star didn’t think it was any good. She said she wouldn’t marry a man that just
brought her a watermelon on Saturday. The grandmother said she would have
done well to marry Mr. Teagarden because he was a gentleman and had bought
Coca-Cola stock when it first came out and that he had died only a few years ago,
a very wealthy man.
They stopped at The Tower for barbecued sandwiches. The Tower was a part
stucco and part wood filling station and dance hall set in a clearing outside of
Timothy. A fat man named Red Sammy Butts ran it and there were signs stuck here
and there on the building and for miles up and down the highway saying, TRY
RED SAMMY’S FAMOUS BARBECUE. NONE LIKE FAMOUS RED
SAMMY’S! RED SAM! THE FAT BOY WITH THE HAPPY LAUGH! A
VETERAN! RED SAMMY’S YOUR MAN!
Red Sammy was lying on the bare ground outside The Tower with his head
under a truck while a gray monkey about a foot high, chained to a small chinaberry
tree, chattered nearby. The monkey sprang back into the tree and got on the highest
limb as soon as he saw the children jump out of the car and run toward him.
Inside, The Tower was a long dark room with a counter at one end and tables
at the other and dancing space in the middle. They all sat down at a board table
next to the nickelodeon and Red Sam’s wife, a tall burnt-brown woman with hair
and eyes lighter than her skin, came and took their order. The children’s mother
put a dime in the machine and played “The Tennessee Waltz,” and the
grandmother said that tune always made her want to dance. She asked Bailey if he
would like to dance but he only glared at her. He didn’t have a naturally sunny
disposition like she did and trips made him nervous. The grandmother’s brown
eyes were very bright. She swayed her head from side to side and pretended she
was dancing in her chair. June Star said play something she could tap to so the
children’s mother put in another dime and played a fast number and June Star
stepped out onto the dance floor and did her tap routine.
“Ain’t she cute?” Red Sam’s wife said, leaning over the counter. “Would you
like to come be my little girl?”
“No I certainly wouldn’t,” June Star said. “I wouldn’t live in a broken-down
place like this for a million bucks!” and she ran back to the table.
“Ain’t she cute?” the woman repeated, stretching her mouth politely.
“Aren’t you ashamed?” hissed the grandmother.
Red Samcame in and told his wife to quit lounging on the counter and hurry up
with these people’s order. His khaki trousers reached just to his hip bones and his
stomach hung over themlike a sack of meal swaying under his shirt. He came over
and sat down at a table nearby and let out a combination sigh and yodel. “You
can’t win,” he said. “You can’t win,” and he wiped his sweating red face off with
a gray handkerchief. “These days you don’t know who to trust,” he said. “Ain’t
that the truth?”
“People are certainly not nice like they used to be,” said the grandmother.
“Two fellers come in here last week,” Red Sammy said, “driving a Chrysler.
It was a old beat-up car but it was a good one and these boys looked all right to
me. Said they worked at the mill and you know I let them fellers charge the gas
they bought? Now why did I do that?”
“Because you’re a good man!” the grandmother said at once.
“Yes’m, I suppose so,” Red Samsaid as if he were struck with this answer.
His wife brought the orders, carrying the five plates all at once without a tray,
two in each hand and one balanced on her arm. “It isn’t a soul in this green world
of God’s that you can trust,” she said. “And I don’t count nobody out of that, not
nobody,” she repeated, looking at Red Sammy.
“Did you read about that criminal, The Misfit, that’s escaped?” asked the
grandmother.
“I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if he didn’t attact this place right here,” said the
woman. “If he hears about it being here, I wouldn’t be none surprised to see him.
If he hears it’s two cent in the cash register, I wouldn’t be a tall surprised if he…”
“That’ll do,” Red Sam said. “Go bring these people their Co’-Colas,” and the
woman went off to get the rest of the order.
“A good man is hard to find,” Red Sammy said. “Everything is getting terrible.
I remember the day you could go off and leave your screen door unlatched. Not no
more.”
He and the grandmother discussed better times. The old lady said that in her
opinion Europe was entirely to blame for the way things were now. She said the
way Europe acted you would think we were made of money and Red Sam said it
was no use talking about it, she was exactly right. The children ran outside into the
white sunlight and looked at the monkey in the lacy china-berry tree. He was busy
catching fleas on himself and biting each one carefully between his teeth as if it
were a delicacy.
They drove off again into the hot afternoon. The grandmother took cat naps and
woke up every few minutes with her own snoring. Outside of Toombsboro she
woke up and recalled an old plantation that she had visited in this neighborhood
once when she was a young lady. She said the house had six white columns across
the front and that there was an avenue of oaks leading up to it and two little
wooden trellis arbors on either side in front where you sat down with your suitor
after a stroll in the garden. She recalled exactly which road to turn off to get to it.
She knew that Bailey would not be willing to lose any time looking at an old
house, but the more she talked about it, the more she wanted to see it once again
and find out if the little twin arbors were still standing. “There was a secret panel
in this house,” she said craftily, not telling the truth but wishing that she were,
“and the story went that all the family silver was hidden in it when Sherman came
through but it was never found…”
“Hey!” John Wesley said. “Let’s go see it! We’ll find it! We’ll poke all the
woodwork and find it! Who lives there? Where do you turn off at? Hey Pop, can’t
we turn off there?”
“We never have seen a house with a secret panel!” June Star shrieked. “Let’s
go to the house with the secret panel! Hey Pop, can’t we go see the house with the
secret panel!”
“It’s not far from here, I know,” the grandmother said. “It wouldn’t take over
twenty minutes.”
Bailey was looking straight ahead. His jaw was as rigid as a horseshoe. “No,”
he said.
The children began to yell and scream that they wanted to see the house with
the secret panel. John Wesley kicked the back of the front seat and June Star hung
over her mother’s shoulder and whined desperately into her ear that they never
had any fun even on their vacation, that they could never do what THEY wanted to
do. The baby began to screamand John Wesley kicked the back of the seat so hard
that his father could feel the blows in his kidney.
“All right!” he shouted and drew the car to a stop at the side of the road. “Will
you all shut up? Will you all just shut up for one second? If you don’t shut up, we
won’t go anywhere.”
“It would be very educational for them,” the grandmother murmured.
“All right,” Bailey said, “but get this: this is the only time we’re going to stop
for anything like this. This is the one and only time.”
“The dirt road that you have to turn down is about a mile back,” the
grandmother directed. “I marked it when we passed.”
“A dirt road,” Bailey groaned.
After they had turned around and were headed toward the dirt road, the
grandmother recalled other points about the house, the beautiful glass over the
front doorway and the candle-lamp in the hall. John Wesley said that the secret
panel was probably in the fireplace.
“You can’t go inside this house,” Bailey said. “You don’t know who lives
there.”
“While you all talk to the people in front, I’ll run around behind and get in a
window,” John Wesley suggested.
“We’ll all stay in the car,” his mother said.
They turned onto the dirt road and the car raced roughly along in a swirl of
pink dust. The grandmother recalled the times when there were no paved roads
and thirty miles was a day’s journey. The dirt road was hilly and there were
sudden washes in it and sharp curves on dangerous embankments. All at once they
would be on a hill, looking down over the blue tops of trees for miles around, then
the next minute, they would be in a red depression with the dust-coated trees
looking down on them.
“This place had better turn up in a minute,” Bailey said, “or I’m going to turn
around.”
The road looked as if no one had traveled on it in months.
“It’s not much farther,” the grandmother said and just as she said it, a horrible
thought came to her. The thought was so embarrassing that she turned red in the
face and her eyes dilated and her feet jumped up, upsetting her valise in the
corner. The instant the valise moved, the newspaper top she had over the basket
under it rose with a snarl and Pitty Sing, the cat, sprang onto Bailey’s shoulder.
The children were thrown to the floor and their mother, clutching the baby,
was thrown out the door onto the ground; the old lady was thrown into the front
seat. The car turned over once and landed right-side-up in a gulch off the side of
the road. Bailey remained in the driver’s seat with the cat—gray-striped with a
broad white face and an orange nose—clinging to his neck like a caterpillar.
As soon as the children saw they could move their arms and legs, they
scrambled out of the car, shouting, “We’ve had anACCIDENT!” The grandmother
was curled up under the dashboard, hoping she was injured so that Bailey’s wrath
would not come down on her all at once. The horrible thought she had had before
the accident was that the house she had remembered so vividly was not in Georgia
but in Tennessee.
Bailey removed the cat from his neck with both hands and flung it out the
window against the side of a pine tree. Then he got out of the car and started
looking for the children’s mother. She was sitting against the side of the red gutted
ditch, holding the screaming baby, but she only had a cut down her face and a
broken shoulder. “We’ve had an ACCIDENT!” the children screamed in a frenzy
of delight.
“But nobody’s killed,” June Star said with disappointment as the grandmother
limped out of the car, her hat still pinned to her head but the broken front brim
standing up at a jaunty angle and the violet spray hanging off the side. They all sat
down in the ditch, except the children, to recover from the shock. They were all
shaking.
“Maybe a car will come along,” said the children’s mother hoarsely.
“I believe I have injured an organ,” said the grandmother, pressing her side,
but no one answered her. Bailey’s teeth were clattering. He had on a yellow sport
shirt with bright blue parrots designed in it and his face was as yellow as the shirt.
The grandmother decided that she would not mention that the house was in
Tennessee.
The road was about ten feet above and they could see only the tops of the trees
on the other side of it. Behind the ditch they were sitting in there were more
woods, tall and dark and deep. In a few minutes they saw a car some distance
away on top of a hill, coming slowly as if the occupants were watching them. The
grandmother stood up and waved both arms dramatically to attract their attention.
The car continued to come on slowly, disappeared around a bend and appeared
again, moving even slower, on top of the hill they had gone over. It was a big
black battered hearse-like automobile. There were three men in it.
It came to a stop just over them and for some minutes, the driver looked down
with a steady expressionless gaze to where they were sitting, and didn’t speak.
Then he turned his head and muttered something to the other two and they got out.
One was a fat boy in black trousers and a red sweat shirt with a silver stallion
embossed on the front of it. He moved around on the right side of them and stood
staring, his mouth partly open in a kind of loose grin. The other had on khaki pants
and a blue striped coat and a gray hat pulled down very low, hiding most of his
face. He came around slowly on the left side. Neither spoke.
The driver got out of the car and stood by the side of it, looking down at them.
He was an older man than the other two. His hair was just beginning to gray and
he wore silver-rimmed spectacles that gave him a scholarly look. He had a long
creased face and didn’t have on any shirt or undershirt. He had on blue jeans that
were too tight for him and was holding a black hat and a gun. The two boys also
had guns.
“We’ve had an ACCIDENT!” the children screamed.
The grandmother had the peculiar feeling that the bespectacled man was
someone she knew. His face was as familiar to her as if she had known himall her
life but she could not recall who he was. He moved away from the car and began
to come down the embankment, placing his feet carefully so that he wouldn’t slip.
He had on tan and white shoes and no socks, and his ankles were red and thin.
“Good afternoon,” he said. “I see you all had you a little spill.”
“We turned over twice!” said the grandmother.
“Oncet,” he corrected. “We seen it happen. Try their car and see will it run,
Hiram,” he said quietly to the boy with the gray hat.
“What you got that gun for?” John Wesley asked. “Whatcha gonna do with that
gun?”
“Lady,” the man said to the children’s mother, “would you mind calling them
children to sit down by you? Children make me nervous. I want all you all to sit
down right together there where you’re at.”
“What are you telling US what to do for?” June Star asked.
Behind them the line of woods gaped like a dark open mouth. “Come here,”
said their mother.
“Look here now,” Bailey began suddenly, “we’re in a predicament! We’re
in…”
The grandmother shrieked. She scrambled to her feet and stood staring.
“You’re The Misfit!” she said. “I recognized you at once!”
“Yes’m,” the man said, smiling slightly as if he were pleased in spite of
himself to be known, “but it would have been better for all of you, lady, if you
hadn’t of reckernized me.”
Bailey turned his head sharply and said something to his mother that shocked
even the children. The old lady began to cry and The Misfit reddened.
“Lady,” he said, “don’t you get upset. Sometimes a man says things he don’t
mean. I don’t reckon he meant to talk to you thataway.”
“You wouldn’t shoot a lady, would you?” the grandmother said and removed a
clean handkerchief fromher cuff and began to slap at her eyes with it.
The Misfit pointed the toe of his shoe into the ground and made a little hole
and then covered it up again. “I would hate to have to,” he said.
“Listen,” the grandmother almost screamed, “I know you’re a good man. You
don’t look a bit like you have common blood. I know you must come from nice
people!”
“Yes mam,” he said, “finest people in the world.” When he smiled he showed
a row of strong white teeth. “God never made a finer woman than my mother and
my daddy’s heart was pure gold,” he said. The boy with the red sweat shirt had
come around behind them and was standing with his gun at his hip. The Misfit
squatted down on the ground. “Watch them children, Bobby Lee,” he said. “You
know they make me nervous.” He looked at the six of them huddled together in
front of him and he seemed to be embarrassed as if he couldn’t think of anything to
say. “Ain’t a cloud in the sky,” he remarked, looking up at it. “Don’t see no sun
but don’t see no cloud neither.”
“Yes, it’s a beautiful day,” said the grandmother. “Listen,” she said, “you
shouldn’t call yourself The Misfit because I know you’re a good man at heart. I
can just look at you and tell.”
“Hush!” Bailey yelled. “Hush! Everybody shut up and let me handle this!” He
was squatting in the position of a runner about to sprint forward but he didn’t
move.
“I pre-chate that, lady,” The Misfit said and drew a little circle in the ground
with the butt of his gun.
“It’ll take a half a hour to fix this here car,” Hiram called, looking over the
raised hood of it.
“Well, first you and Bobby Lee get him and that little boy to step over yonder
with you,” The Misfit said, pointing to Bailey and John Wesley. “The boys want
to ast you something,” he said to Bailey. “Would you mind stepping back in them
woods there with them?”
“Listen,” Bailey began, “we’re in a terrible predicament! Nobody realizes
what this is,” and his voice cracked. His eyes were as blue and intense as the
parrots in his shirt and he remained perfectly still.
The grandmother reached up to adjust her hat brim as if she were going to the
woods with him but it came off in her hand. She stood staring at it and after a
second she let it fall on the ground. Hiram pulled Bailey up by the arm as if he
were assisting an old man. John Wesley caught hold of his father’s hand and
Bobby Lee followed. They went off toward the woods and just as they reached the
dark edge, Bailey turned and supporting himself against a gray naked pine trunk,
he shouted, “I’ll be back in a minute, Mamma, wait on me!”
“Come back this instant!” his mother shrilled but they all disappeared into the
woods.
“Bailey Boy!” the grandmother called in a tragic voice but she found she was
looking at The Misfit squatting on the ground in front of her. “I just know you’re a
good man,” she said desperately. “You’re not a bit common!”
“Nome, I ain’t a good man,” The Misfit said after a second as if he had
considered her statement carefully, “but I ain’t the worst in the world neither. My
daddy said I was a different breed of dog from my brothers and sisters. ‘You
know,’ Daddy said, ‘it’s some that can live their whole life out without asking
about it and it’s others has to know why it is, and this boy is one of the latters.
He’s going to be into everything!’” He put on his black hat and looked up suddenly
and then away deep into the woods as if he were embarrassed again. “I’m sorry I
don’t have on a shirt before you ladies,” he said, hunching his shoulders slightly.
“We buried our clothes that we had on when we escaped and we’re just making
do until we can get better. We borrowed these from some folks we met,” he
explained.
“That’s perfectly all right,” the grandmother said. “Maybe Bailey has an extra
shirt in his suitcase.”
“I’ll look and see terrectly,” The Misfit said.
“Where are they taking him?” the children’s mother screamed.
“Daddy was a card himself,” The Misfit said. “You couldn’t put anything over
on him. He never got in trouble with the Authorities though. Just had the knack of
handling them.”
“You could be honest too if you’d only try,” said the grandmother. “Think how
wonderful it would be to settle down and live a comfortable life and not have to
think about somebody chasing you all the time.”
The Misfit kept scratching in the ground with the butt of his gun as if he were
thinking about it. “Yes’m, somebody is always after you,” he murmured.
The grandmother noticed how thin his shoulder blades were just behind his hat
because she was standing up looking down on him. “Do you ever pray?” she
asked.
He shook his head. All she saw was the black hat wiggle between his shoulder
blades. “Nome,” he said.
There was a pistol shot from the woods, followed closely by another. Then
silence. The old lady’s head jerked around. She could hear the wind move through
the tree tops like a long satisfied insuck of breath. “Bailey Boy!” she called.
“I was a gospel singer for a while,” The Misfit said. “I been most everything.
Been in the arm service, both land and sea, at home and abroad, been twict
married, been an undertaker, been with the railroads, plowed Mother Earth, been
in a tornado, seen a man burnt alive oncet,” and looked up at the children’s mother
and the little girl who were sitting close together, their faces white and their eyes
glassy; “I even seen a woman flogged,” he said.
“Pray, pray,” the grandmother began, “pray, pray…”
“I never was a bad boy that I remember of,” The Misfit said in an almost
dreamy voice, “but somewheres along the line I done something wrong and got
sent to the penitentiary. I was buried alive,” and he looked up and held her
attention to himby a steady stare.
“That’s when you should have started to pray,” she said. “What did you do to
get sent to the penitentiary that first time?”
“Turn to the right, it was a wall,” The Misfit said, looking up again at the
cloudless sky. “Turn to the left, it was a wall. Look up it was a ceiling, look down
it was a floor. I forget what I done, lady. I set there and set there, trying to
remember what it was I done and I ain’t recalled it to this day. Oncet in a while, I
would think it was coming to me, but it never come.”
“Maybe they put you in by mistake,” the old lady said vaguely.
“Nome,” he said. “It wasn’t no mistake. They had the papers on me.”
“You must have stolen something,” she said.
The Misfit sneered slightly. “Nobody had nothing I wanted,” he said. “It was a
head-doctor at the penitentiary said what I had done was kill my daddy but I
known that for a lie. My daddy died in nineteen ought nineteen of the epidemic flu
and I never had a thing to do with it. He was buried in the Mount Hopewell
Baptist churchyard and you can go there and see for yourself.”
“If you would pray,” the old lady said, “Jesus would help you.”
“That’s right,” The Misfit said.
“Well then, why don’t you pray?” she asked trembling with delight suddenly.
“I don’t want no hep,” he said. “I’mdoing all right by myself.”
Bobby Lee and Hiram came ambling back from the woods. Bobby Lee was
dragging a yellow shirt with bright blue parrots in it.
“Thow me that shirt, Bobby Lee,” The Misfit said. The shirt came flying at him
and landed on his shoulder and he put it on. The grandmother couldn’t name what
the shirt reminded her of. “No, lady,” The Misfit said while he was buttoning it
up, “I found out the crime don’t matter. You can do one thing or you can do
another, kill a man or take a tire off his car, because sooner or later you’re going
to forget what it was you done and just be punished for it.”
The children’s mother had begun to make heaving noises as if she couldn’t get
her breath. “Lady,” he asked, “would you and that little girl like to step off yonder
with Bobby Lee and Hiramand join your husband?”
“Yes, thank you,” the mother said faintly. Her left arm dangled helplessly and
she was holding the baby, who had gone to sleep, in the other. “Hep that lady up,
Hiram,” The Misfit said as she struggled to climb out of the ditch, “and Bobby
Lee, you hold onto that little girl’s hand.”
“I don’t want to hold hands with him,” June Star said. “He reminds me of a
pig.”
The fat boy blushed and laughed and caught her by the arm and pulled her off
into the woods after Hiramand her mother.
Alone with The Misfit, the grandmother found that she had lost her voice.
There was not a cloud in the sky nor any sun. There was nothing around her but
woods. She wanted to tell himthat he must pray. She opened and closed her mouth
several times before anything came out. Finally she found herself saying, “Jesus,
Jesus,” meaning, Jesus will help you, but the way she was saying it, it sounded as
if she might be cursing.
“Yes’m,” The Misfit said as if he agreed. “Jesus thown everything off balance.
It was the same case with Him as with me except He hadn’t committed any crime
and they could prove I had committed one because they had the papers on me. Of
course,” he said, “they never shown me my papers. That’s why I sign myself now.
I said long ago, you get you a signature and sign everything you do and keep a
copy of it. Then you’ll know what you done and you can hold up the crime to the
punishment and see do they match and in the end you’ll have something to prove
you ain’t been treated right. I call myself The Misfit,” he said, “because I can’t
make what all I done wrong fit what all I gone through in punishment.”
There was a piercing scream from the woods, followed closely by a pistol
report. “Does it seem right to you, lady, that one is punished a heap and another
ain’t punished at all?”
“Jesus!” the old lady cried. “You’ve got good blood! I know you wouldn’t
shoot a lady! I know you come from nice people! Pray! Jesus, you ought not to
shoot a lady. I’ll give you all the money I’ve got!”
“Lady,” The Misfit said, looking beyond her far into the woods, “there never
was a body that give the undertaker a tip.”
There were two more pistol reports and the grandmother raised her head like a
parched old turkey hen crying for water and called, “Bailey Boy, Bailey Boy!” as
if her heart would break.
“Jesus was the only One that ever raised the dead.” The Misfit continued, “and
He shouldn’t have done it. He thrown everything off balance. If He did what He
said, then it’s nothing for you to do but throw away everything and follow Him,
and if He didn’t, then it’s nothing for you to do but enjoy the few minutes you got
left the best way you can—by killing somebody or burning down his house or
doing some other meanness to him. No pleasure but meanness,” he said and his
voice had become almost a snarl.
“Maybe He didn’t raise the dead,” the old lady mumbled, not knowing what
she was saying and feeling so dizzy that she sank down in the ditch with her legs
twisted under her.
“I wasn’t there so I can’t say He didn’t,” The Misfit said. “I wisht I had of
been there,” he said, hitting the ground with his fist. “It ain’t right I wasn’t there
because if I had of been there I would of known. Listen lady,” he said in a high
voice, “if I had of been there I would of known and I wouldn’t be like I am now.”
His voice seemed about to crack and the grandmother’s head cleared for an
instant. She saw the man’s face twisted close to her own as if he were going to cry
and she murmured, “Why you’re one of my babies. You’re one of my own
children!” She reached out and touched him on the shoulder. The Misfit sprang
back as if a snake had bitten him and shot her three times through the chest. Then
he put his gun down on the ground and took off his glasses and began to clean
them.
Hiram and Bobby Lee returned from the woods and stood over the ditch,
looking down at the grandmother who half sat and half lay in a puddle of blood
with her legs crossed under her like a child’s and her face smiling up at the
cloudless sky.
Without his glasses, The Misfit’s eyes were red-rimmed and pale and
defenseless-looking. “Take her off and throw her where you thrown the others,”
he said, picking up the cat that was rubbing itself against his leg.
“She was a talker, wasn’t she?” Bobby Lee said, sliding down the ditch with a
yodel.
“She would of been a good woman,” The Misfit said, “if it had been
somebody there to shoot her every minute of her life.”
“Some fun!” Bobby Lee said.
“Shut up, Bobby Lee,” The Misfit said. “It’s no real pleasure in life.”
A Late Encounter with the Enemy
GENERAL SASH was a hundred and four years old. He lived with his
granddaughter, Sally Poker Sash, who was sixty-two years old and who prayed
every night on her knees that he would live until her graduation from college. The
General didn’t give two slaps for her graduation but he never doubted he would
live for it. Living had got to be such a habit with him that he couldn’t conceive of
any other condition. A graduation exercise was not exactly his idea of a good
time, even if, as she said, he would be expected to sit on the stage in his uniform.
She said there would be a long procession of teachers and students in their robes
but that there wouldn’t be anything to equal him in his uniform. He knew this well
enough without her telling him, and as for the damn procession, it could march to
hell and back and not cause him a quiver. He liked parades with floats full of
Miss Americas and Miss Daytona Beaches and Miss Queen Cotton Products. He
didn’t have any use for processions and a procession full of schoolteachers was
about as deadly as the River Styx to his way of thinking. However, he was willing
to sit on the stage in his uniformso that they could see him.
Sally Poker was not as sure as he was that he would live until her graduation.
There had not been any perceptible change in him for the last five years, but she
had the sense that she might be cheated out of her triumph because she so often
was. She had been going to summer school every year for the past twenty because
when she started teaching, there were no such things as degrees. In those times,
she said, everything was normal but nothing had been normal since she was
sixteen, and for the past twenty summers, when she should have been resting, she
had had to take a trunk in the burning heat to the state teacher’s college; and though
when she returned in the fall, she always taught in the exact way she had been
taught not to teach, this was a mild revenge that didn’t satisfy her sense of justice.
She wanted the General at her graduation because she wanted to show what she
stood for, or, as she said, “what all was behind her,” and was not behind them.
This them was not anybody in particular. It was just all the upstarts who had
turned the world on its head and unsettled the ways of decent living.
She meant to stand on that platform in August with the General sitting in his
wheel chair on the stage behind her and she meant to hold her head very high as if
she were saying, “See him! See him! My kin, all you upstarts! Glorious upright old
man standing for the old traditions! Dignity! Honor! Courage! See him!” One night
in her sleep she screamed, “See him! See him!” and turned her head and found him
sitting in his wheel chair behind her with a terrible expression on his face and
with all his clothes off except the general’s hat and she had waked up and had not
dared to go back to sleep again that night.
For his part, the General would not have consented even to attend her
graduation if she had not promised to see to it that he sit on the stage. He liked to
sit on any stage. He considered that he was still a very handsome man. When he
had been able to stand up, he had measured five feet four inches of pure game
cock. He had white hair that reached to his shoulders behind and he would not
wear teeth because he thought his profile was more striking without them. When
he put on his full-dress general’s uniform, he knew well enough that there was
nothing to match himanywhere.
This was not the same uniform he had worn in the War between the States. He
had not actually been a general in that war. He had probably been a foot soldier;
he didn’t remember what he had been; in fact, he didn’t remember that war at all.
It was like his feet, which hung down now shriveled at the very end of him,
without feeling, covered with a blue-gray afghan that Sally Poker had crocheted
when she was a little girl. He didn’t remember the Spanish-American War in
which he had lost a son; he didn’t even remember the son. He didn’t have any use
for history because he never expected to meet it again. To his mind, history was
connected with processions and life with parades and he liked parades. People
were always asking him if he remembered this or that—a dreary black procession
of questions about the past. There was only one event in the past that had any
significance for him and that he cared to talk about: that was twelve years ago
when he had received the general’s uniformand had been in the premiere.
“I was in that preemy they had in Atlanta,” he would tell visitors sitting on his
front porch. “Surrounded by beautiful guls. It wasn’t a thing local about it. It was
nothing local about it. Listen here. It was a nashnul event and they had me in it—
up onto the stage. There was no bob-tails at it. Every person at it had paid ten
dollars to get in and had to wear his tuxseeder. I was in this uniform. A beautiful
gul presented me with it that afternoon in a hotel room.”
“It was in a suite in the hotel and I was in it too, Papa,” Sally Poker would
say, winking at the visitors. “You weren’t alone with any young lady in a hotel
room.”
“Was, I’d a known what to do,” the old General would say with a sharp look
and the visitors would scream with laughter. “This was a Hollywood, California,
gul,” he’d continue. “She was from Hollywood, California, and didn’t have any
part in the pitcher. Out there they have so many beautiful guls that they don’t need
that they call them a extra and they don’t use them for nothing but presenting
people with things and having their pitchers taken. They took my pitcher with her.
No, it was two of them. One on either side and me in the middle with my arms
around each of them’s waist and their waist ain’t any bigger than a half a dollar.”
Sally Poker would interrupt again. “It was Mr. Govisky that gave you the
uniform, Papa, and he gave me the most exquisite corsage. Really, I wish you
could have seen it. It was made with gladiola petals taken off and painted gold
and put back together to look like a rose. It was exquisite. I wish you could have
seen it, it was…”
“It was as big as her head,” the General would snarl. “I was tellin it. They
gimme this uniform and they gimme this soward and they say, ‘Now General, we
don’t want you to start a war on us. All we want you to do is march right up on
that stage when you’re innerduced tonight and answer a few questions. Think you
can do that?’ ‘Think I can do it!’ I say. ‘Listen here. I was doing things before you
were born,’ and they hollered.”
“He was the hit of the show,” Sally Poker would say, but she didn’t much like
to remember the premiere on account of what had happened to her feet at it. She
had bought a new dress for the occasion—a long black crepe dinner dress with a
rhinestone buckle and a bolero—and a pair of silver slippers to wear with it,
because she was supposed to go up on the stage with himto keep himfromfalling.
Everything was arranged for them. A real limousine came at ten minutes to eight
and took themto the theater. It drew up under the marquee at exactly the right time,
after the big stars and the director and the author and the governor and the mayor
and some less important stars. The police kept traffic from jamming and there
were ropes to keep the people off who couldn’t go. All the people who couldn’t
go watched them step out of the limousine into the lights. Then they walked down
the red and gold foyer and an usherette in a Confederate cap and little short skirt
conducted themto their special seats. The audience was already there and a group
of UDC members began to clap when they saw the General in his uniform and that
started everybody to clap. A few more celebrities came after them and then the
doors closed and the lights went down.
A young man with blond wavy hair who said he represented the motionpicture industry came out and began to introduce everybody and each one who
was introduced walked up on the stage and said how really happy he was to be
here for this great event. The General and his granddaughter were introduced
sixteenth on the program. He was introduced as General Tennessee Flintrock Sash
of the Confederacy, though Sally Poker had told Mr. Govisky that his name was
George Poker Sash and that he had only been a major. She helped him up from his
seat but her heart was beating so fast she didn’t know whether she’d make it
herself.
The old man walked up the aisle slowly with his fierce white head high and
his hat held over his heart. The orchestra began to play the Confederate Battle
Hymn very softly and the UDC members rose as a group and did not sit down
again until the General was on the stage. When he reached the center of the stage
with Sally Poker just behind him guiding his elbow, the orchestra burst out in a
loud rendition of the Battle Hymn and the old man, with real stage presence, gave
a vigorous trembling salute and stood at attention until the last blast had died
away. Two of the usherettes in Confederate caps and short skirts held a
Confederate and a Union flag crossed behind them.
The General stood in the exact center of the spotlight and it caught a weird
moon-shaped slice of Sally Poker—the corsage, the rhinestone buckle and one
hand clenched around a white glove and handkerchief. The young man with the
blond wavy hair inserted himself into the circle of light and said he was really
happy to have here tonight for this great event, one, he said, who had fought and
bled in the battles they would soon see daringly reacted on the screen, and “Tell
me, General,” he asked, “how old are you?”
“Niiiiiinnttty-two!” the General screamed.
The young man looked as if this were just about the most impressive thing that
had been said all evening. “Ladies and gentlemen,” he said, “let’s give the
General the biggest hand we’ve got!” and there was applause immediately and the
young man indicated to Sally Poker with a motion of his thumb that she could take
the old man back to his seat now so that the next person could be introduced; but
the General had not finished. He stood immovable in the exact center of the
spotlight, his neck thrust forward, his mouth slightly open, and his voracious gray
eyes drinking in the glare and the applause. He elbowed his granddaughter roughly
away. “How I keep so young,” he screeched, “I kiss all the pretty guls!”
This was met with a great din of spontaneous applause and it was at just that
instant that Sally Poker looked down at her feet and discovered that in the
excitement of getting ready she had forgotten to change her shoes: two brown Girl
Scout oxfords protruded fromthe bottomof her dress. She gave the General a yank
and almost ran with him off the stage. He was very angry that he had not got to say
how glad he was to be here for this event and on the way back to his seat, he kept
saying as loud as he could, “I’m glad to be here at this preemy with all these
beautiful guls!” but there was another celebrity going up the other aisle and
nobody paid any attention to him. He slept through the picture, muttering fiercely
every now and then in his sleep.
Since then, his life had not been very interesting. His feet were completely
dead now, his knees worked like old hinges, his kidneys functioned when they
would, but his heart persisted doggedly to beat. The past and the future were the
same thing to him, one forgotten and the other not remembered; he had no more
notion of dying than a cat. Every year on Confederate Memorial Day, he was
bundled up and lent to the Capitol City Museum where he was displayed from one
to four in a musty room full of old photographs, old uniforms, old artillery, and
historic documents. All these were carefully preserved in glass cases so that
children would not put their hands on them. He wore his general’s uniform from
the premiere and sat, with a fixed scowl, inside a small roped area. There was
nothing about him to indicate that he was alive except an occasional movement in
his milky gray eyes, but once when a bold child touched his sword, his arm shot
forward and slapped the hand off in an instant. In the spring when the old homes
were opened for pilgrimages, he was invited to wear his uniform and sit in some
conspicuous spot and lend atmosphere to the scene. Some of these times he only
snarled at the visitors but sometimes he told about the premiere and the beautiful
girls.
If he had died before Sally Poker’s graduation, she thought she would have
died herself. At the beginning of the summer term, even before she knew if she
would pass, she told the Dean that her grandfather, General Tennessee Flintrock
Sash of the Confederacy, would attend her graduation and that he was a hundred
and four years old and that his mind was still clear as a bell. Distinguished
visitors were always welcome and could sit on the stage and be introduced. She
made arrangements with her nephew, John Wesley Poker Sash, a Boy Scout, to
come wheel the General’s chair. She thought how sweet it would be to see the old
man in his courageous gray and the young boy in his clean khaki—the old and the
new, she thought appropriately—they would be behind her on the stage when she
received her degree.
Everything went almost exactly as she had planned. In the summer while she
was away at school, the General stayed with other relatives and they brought him
and John Wesley, the Boy Scout, down to the graduation. A reporter came to the
hotel where they stayed and took the General’s picture with Sally Poker on one
side of him and John Wesley on the other. The General, who had had his picture
taken with beautiful girls, didn’t think much of this. He had forgotten precisely
what kind of event this was he was going to attend but he remembered that he was
to wear his uniformand carry the sword.
On the morning of the graduation, Sally Poker had to line up in the academic
procession with the B.S.’s in Elementary Education and she couldn’t see to getting
him on the stage herself—but John Wesley, a fat blond boy of ten with an
executive expression, guaranteed to take care of everything. She came in her
academic gown to the hotel and dressed the old man in his uniform. He was as
frail as a dried spider. “Aren’t you just thrilled, Papa?” she asked. “I’m just
thrilled to death!”
“Put the soward acrost my lap, damm you,” the old man said, “where it’ll
shine.”
She put it there and then stood back looking at him. “You look just grand,” she
said.
“God damm it,” the old man said in a slow monotonous certain tone as if he
were saying it to the beating of his heart. “God dammevery goddamthing to hell.”
“Now, now,” she said and left happily to join the procession.
The graduates were lined up behind the Science building and she found her
place just as the line started to move. She had not slept much the night before and
when she had, she had dreamed of the exercises, murmuring, “See him, see him?”
in her sleep but waking up every time just before she turned her head to look at
him behind her. The graduates had to walk three blocks in the hot sun in their
black wool robes and as she plodded stolidly along she thought that if anyone
considered this academic procession something impressive to behold, they need
only wait until they saw that old General in his courageous gray and that clean
young Boy Scout stoutly wheeling his chair across the stage with the sunlight
catching the sword. She imagined that John Wesley had the old man ready now
behind the stage.
The black procession wound its way up the two blocks and started on the main
walk leading to the auditorium. The visitors stood on the grass, picking out their
graduates. Men were pushing back their hats and wiping their foreheads and
women were lifting their dresses slightly from the shoulders to keep them from
sticking to their backs. The graduates in their heavy robes looked as if the last
beads of ignorance were being sweated out of them. The sun blazed off the fenders
of automobiles and beat from the columns of the buildings and pulled the eye from
one spot of glare to another. It pulled Sally Poker’s toward the big red Coca-Cola
machine that had been set up by the side of the auditorium. Here she saw the
General parked, scowling and hatless in his chair in the blazing sun while John
Wesley, his blouse loose behind, his hip and cheek pressed to the red machine,
was drinking a Coca-Cola. She broke from the line and galloped to them and
snatched the bottle away. She shook the boy and thrust in his blouse and put the hat
on the old man’s head. “Now get him in there!” she said, pointing one rigid finger
to the side door of the building.
For his part the General felt as if there were a little hole beginning to widen in
the top of his head. The boy wheeled him rapidly down a walk and up a ramp and
into a building and bumped him over the stage entrance and into position where he
had been told and the General glared in front of him at heads that all seemed to
flow together and eyes that moved from one face to another. Several figures in
black robes came and picked up his hand and shook it. A black procession was
flowing up each aisle and forming to stately music in a pool in front of him. The
music seemed to be entering his head through the little hole and he thought for a
second that the procession would try to enter it too.
He didn’t know what procession this was but there was something familiar
about it. It must be familiar to himsince it had come to meet him, but he didn’t like
a black procession. Any procession that came to meet him, he thought irritably,
ought to have floats with beautiful guls on themlike the floats before the preemy. It
must be something connected with history like they were always having. He had
no use for any of it. What happened then wasn’t anything to a man living now and
he was living now.
When all the procession had flowed into the black pool, a black figure began
orating in front of it. The figure was telling something about history and the
General made up his mind he wouldn’t listen, but the words kept seeping in
through the little hole in his head. He heard his own name mentioned and his chair
was shuttled forward roughly and the Boy Scout took a big bow. They called his
name and the fat brat bowed. Goddam you, the old man tried to say, get out of my
way, I can stand up!—but he was jerked back again before he could get up and
take the bow. He supposed the noise they made was for him. If he was over, he
didn’t intend to listen to any more of it. If it hadn’t been for the little hole in the
top of his head, none of the words would have got to him. He thought of putting his
finger up there into the hole to block them but the hole was a little wider than his
finger and it felt as if it were getting deeper.
Another black robe had taken the place of the first one and was talking now
and he heard his name mentioned again but they were not talking about him, they
were still talking about history. “If we forget our past,” the speaker was saying,
“we won’t remember our future and it will be as well for we won’t have one.”
The General heard some of these words gradually. He had forgotten history and he
didn’t intend to remember it again. He had forgotten the name and face of his wife
and the names and faces of his children or even if he had a wife and children, and
he had forgotten the names of places and the places themselves and what had
happened at them.
He was considerably irked by the hole in his head. He had not expected to
have a hole in his head at this event. It was the slow black music that had put it
there and though most of the music had stopped outside, there was still a little of it
in the hole, going deeper and moving around in his thoughts, letting the words he
heard into the dark places of his brain. He heard the words, Chickamauga, Shiloh,
Johnston, Lee, and he knew he was inspiring all these words that meant nothing to
him. He wondered if he had been a general at Chickamauga or at Lee. Then he
tried to see himself and the horse mounted in the middle of a float full of beautiful
girls, being driven slowly through downtown Atlanta. Instead, the old words
began to stir in his head as if they were trying to wrench themselves out of place
and come to life.
The speaker was through with that war and had gone on to the next one and
now he was approaching another and all his words, like the black procession,
were vaguely familiar and irritating. There was a long finger of music in the
General’s head, probing various spots that were words, letting in a little light on
the words and helping them to live. The words began to come toward him and he
said, Dammit! I ain’t going to have it! and he started edging backwards to get out
of the way. Then he saw the figure in the black robe sit down and there was a
noise and the black pool in front of him began to rumble and to flow toward him
from either side to the black slow music, and he said, Stop dammit! I can’t do but
one thing at a time! He couldn’t protect himself from the words and attend to the
procession too and the words were coming at him fast. He felt that he was running
backwards and the words were coming at him like musket fire, just escaping him
but getting nearer and nearer. He turned around and began to run as fast as he
could but he found himself running toward the words. He was running into a
regular volley of them and meeting them with quick curses. As the music swelled
toward him, the entire past opened up on him out of nowhere and he felt his body
riddled in a hundred places with sharp stabs of pain and he fell down, returning a
curse for every hit. He saw his wife’s narrow face looking at him critically
through her round gold-rimmed glasses; he saw one of his squinting bald-headed
sons; and his mother ran toward him with an anxious look; then a succession of
places—Chickamauga, Shiloh, Marthasville—rushed at himas if the past were the
only future now and he had to endure it. Then suddenly he saw that the black
procession was almost on him. He recognized it, for it had been dogging all his
days. He made such a desperate effort to see over it and find out what comes after
the past that his hand clenched the sword until the blade touched bone.
The graduates were crossing the stage in a long file to receive their scrolls and
shake the president’s hand. As Sally Poker, who was near the end, crossed, she
glanced at the General and saw him sitting fixed and fierce, his eyes wide open,
and she turned her head forward again and held it a perceptible degree higher and
received her scroll. Once it was all over and she was out of the auditorium in the
sun again, she located her kin and they waited together on a bench in the shade for
John Wesley to wheel the old man out. That crafty scout had bumped him out the
back way and rolled him at high speed down a flagstone path and was waiting
now, with the corpse, in the long line at the Coca-Cola machine.