One sunny autumn afternoon a child strayed away from its
rude home in a small field and entered a forest unobserved. It was happy in a new sense of freedom from control,
happy in the opportunity of exploration and adventure; for
this child’s spirit, in bodies of its ancestors, had for thousands of years been trained to memorable feats of discovery
and conquest—victories in battles whose critical moments were
centuries, whose victors’ camps were cities of hewn stone.
From the cradle of its race it had conquered its way through
two continents and passing a great sea had penetrated a third,
there to be born to war and dominion as a heritage.
The child was a boy aged about six years, the son of a poor
planter. In his younger manhood the father had been a soldier,
had fought against naked savages and followed the flag of his
country into the capital of a civilized race to the far South. In
the peaceful life of a planter the warrior-fire survived; once
kindled, it is never extinguished. The man loved military books
and pictures and the boy had understood enough to make himself a wooden sword, though even the eye of his father would
hardly have known it for what it was. This weapon he now
bore bravely, as became the son of an heroic race, and pausing
now and again in the sunny space of the forest assumed, with
some exaggeration, the postures of aggression and defense
that he had been taught by the engraver’s art. Made reckless
by the ease with which he overcame invisible foes attempting
to stay his advance, he committed the common enough military error of pushing the pursuit to a dangerous extreme, until
he found himself upon the margin of a wide but shallow brook,
whose rapid waters barred his direct advance against the flying
foe that had crossed with illogical ease. But the intrepid victor
was not to be baffled; the spirit of the race which had passed
the great sea burned unconquerable in that small breast and
would not be denied. Finding a place where some bowlders in
the bed of the stream lay but a step or a leap apart, he made his
way across and fell again upon the rear-guard of his imaginary
foe, putting all to the sword.
Now that the battle had been won, prudence required that
he withdraw to his base of operations. Alas; like many a
mightier conqueror, and like one, the mightiest, he could not
curb the lust for war,
Nor learn that tempted Fate will leave the loftiest star.
Advancing from the bank of the creek he suddenly found
himself confronted with a new and more formidable enemy: in
the path that he was following, sat, bolt upright, with ears erect
and paws suspended before it, a rabbit! With a startled cry the
child turned and fled, he knew not in what direction, calling
with inarticulate cries for his mother, weeping, stumbling, his
tender skin cruelly torn by brambles, his little heart beating
hard with terror—breathless, blind with tears—lost in the forest! Then, for more than an hour, he wandered with erring
feet through the tangled undergrowth, till at last, overcome by
fatigue, he lay down in a narrow space between two rocks,
within a few yards of the stream and still grasping his toy
sword, no longer a weapon but a companion, sobbed himself
to sleep. The wood birds sang merrily above his head; the squirrels, whisking their bravery of tail, ran barking from tree to
tree, unconscious of the pity of it, and somewhere far away was
a strange, muffled thunder, as if the partridges were drumming
in celebration of nature’s victory over the son of her immemorial enslavers. And back at the little plantation, where white
men and black were hastily searching the fields and hedges in
alarm, a mother’s heart was breaking for her missing child.
Hours passed, and then the little sleeper rose to his feet. The
chill of the evening was in his limbs, the fear of the gloom in
his heart. But he had rested, and he no longer wept. With some
blind instinct which impelled to action he struggled through
the undergrowth about him and came to a more open ground
—on his right the brook, to the left a gentle acclivity studded
with infrequent trees; over all, the gathering gloom of twilight.
A thin, ghostly mist rose along the water. It frightened and
repelled him; instead of recrossing, in the direction whence he
had come, he turned his back upon it, and went forward toward the dark inclosing wood. Suddenly he saw before him a
strange moving object which he took to be some large animal
—a dog, a pig—he could not name it; perhaps it was a bear. 
He had seen pictures of bears, but knew of nothing to their
discredit and had vaguely wished to meet one. But something
in form or movement of this object—something in the awkwardness of its approach—told him that it was not a bear, and
curiosity was stayed by fear. He stood still and as it came slowly
on gained courage every moment, for he saw that at least it
had not the long menacing ears of the rabbit. Possibly his impressionable mind was half conscious of something familiar in
its shambling, awkward gait. Before it had approached near
enough to resolve his doubts he saw that it was followed by
another and another. To right and to left were many more; the
whole open space about him were alive with them—all moving
toward the brook.
They were men. They crept upon their hands and knees.
They used their hands only, dragging their legs. They used their
knees only, their arms hanging idle at their sides. They strove
to rise to their feet, but fell prone in the attempt. They did
nothing naturally, and nothing alike, save only to advance foot
by foot in the same direction. Singly, in pairs and in little
groups, they came on through the gloom, some halting now
and again while others crept slowly past them, then resuming
their movement. They came by dozens and by hundreds; as far
on either hand as one could see in the deepening gloom they
extended and the black wood behind them appeared to be inexhaustible. The very ground seemed in motion toward the
creek. Occasionally one who had paused did not again go on,
but lay motionless. He was dead. Some, pausing, made strange
gestures with their hands, erected their arms and lowered them
again, clasped their heads; spread their palms upward, as men
are sometimes seen to do in public prayer.
Not all of this did the child note; it is what would have been
noted by an elder observer; he saw little but that these were
men, yet crept like babes. Being men, they were not terrible,
though unfamiliarly clad. He moved among them freely, going
from one to another and peering into their faces with childish
curiosity. All their faces were singularly white and many were
streaked and gouted with red. Something in this—something
too, perhaps, in their grotesque attitudes and movements—
reminded him of the painted clown whom he had seen last
summer in the circus, and he laughed as he watched them. But
on and ever on they crept, these maimed and bleeding men,
as heedless as he of the dramatic contrast between his laughter
and their own ghastly gravity. To him it was a merry spectacle.
He had seen his father’s negroes creep upon their hands and knees
for his amusement—had ridden them so, “making believe” they
were his horses. He now approached one of these crawling
figures from behind and with an agile movement mounted it
astride. The man sank upon his breast, recovered, flung the
small boy fiercely to the ground as an unbroken colt might
have done, then turned upon him a face that lacked a lower
jaw—from the upper teeth to the throat was a great red gap
fringed with hanging shreds of flesh and splinters of bone. The
unnatural prominence of nose, the absence of chin, the fierce
eyes, gave this man the appearance of a great bird of prey
crimsoned in throat and breast by the blood of its quarry. The
man rose to his knees, the child to his feet. The man shook his
fist at the child; the child, terrified at last, ran to a tree near by,
got upon the farther side of it and took a more serious view
of the situation. And so the clumsy multitude dragged itself
slowly and painfully along in hideous pantomime—moved
forward down the slope like a swarm of great black beetles,
with never a sound of going—in silence profound, absolute.
Instead of darkening, the haunted landscape began to brighten.
Through the belt of trees beyond the brook shone a strange
red light, the trunks and branches of the trees making a black
lacework against it. It struck the creeping figures and gave
them monstrous shadows, which caricatured their movements
on the lit grass. It fell upon their faces, touching their whiteness with a ruddy tinge, accentuating the stains with which so
many of them were freaked and maculated. It sparkled on buttons and bits of metal in their clothing. Instinctively the child
turned toward the growing splendor and moved down the
slope with his horrible companions; in a few moments had
passed the foremost of the throng—not much of a feat, considering his advantages. He placed himself in the lead, his
wooden sword still in hand, and solemnly directed the march,
conforming his pace to theirs and occasionally turning as if to
see that his forces did not straggle. Surely such a leader never
before had such a following.
Scattered about upon the ground now slowly narrowing by 
the encroachment of this awful march to water, were certain
articles to which, in the leader’s mind, were coupled no significant associations: an occasional blanket, tightly rolled lengthwise, doubled and the ends bound together with a string; a
heavy knapsack here, and there a broken rifle—such things, in
short, as are found in the rear of retreating troops, the “spoor”
of men flying from their hunters. Everywhere near the creek,
which here had a margin of lowland, the earth was trodden
into mud by the feet of men and horses. An observer of better
experience in the use of his eyes would have noticed that these
footprints pointed in both directions; the ground had been
twice passed over—in advance and in retreat. A few hours before,
these desperate, stricken men, with their more fortunate and now
distant comrades, had penetrated the forest in thousands. Their
successive battalions, breaking into swarms and re-forming in
lines, had passed the child on every side—had almost trodden
on him as he slept. The rustle and murmur of their march had
not awakened him. Almost within a stone’s throw of where he
lay they had fought a battle; but all unheard by him were the
roar of the musketry, the shock of the cannon, “the thunder of
the captains and the shouting.” He had slept through it all,
grasping his little wooden sword with perhaps a tighter clutch
in unconscious sympathy with his martial environment, but as
heedless of the grandeur of the struggle as the dead who had
died to make the glory.
The fire beyond the belt of woods on the farther side of the
creek, reflected to earth from the canopy of its own smoke, was
now suffusing the whole landscape. It transformed the sinuous
line of mist to the vapor of gold. The water gleamed with
dashes of red, and red, too, were many of the stones protruding above the surface. But that was blood; the less desperately
wounded had stained them in crossing. On them, too, the
child now crossed with eager steps; he was going to the fire. As
he stood upon the farther bank he turned about to look at the
companions of his march. The advance was arriving at the creek.
The stronger had already drawn themselves to the brink and
plunged their faces into the flood. Three or four who lay without motion appeared to have no heads. At this the child’s eyes
expanded with wonder; even his hospitable understanding 
could not accept a phenomenon implying such vitality as that.
After slaking their thirst these men had not had the strength to
back away from the water, nor to keep their heads above it.
They were drowned. In rear of these, the open spaces of the
forest showed the leader as many formless figures of his grim
command as at first; but not nearly so many were in motion.
He waved his cap for their encouragement and smilingly pointed
with his weapon in the direction of the guiding light—a pillar
of fire to this strange exodus.
Confident of the fidelity of his forces, he now entered the
belt of woods, passed through it easily in the red illumination,
climbed a fence, ran across a field, turning now and again to
coquet with his responsive shadow, and so approached the blazing ruin of a dwelling. Desolation everywhere! In all the wide
glare not a living thing was visible. He cared nothing for that;
the spectacle pleased, and he danced with glee in imitation of
the wavering flames. He ran about, collecting fuel, but every
object that he found was too heavy for him to cast in from the
distance to which the heat limited his approach. In despair he
flung in his sword—a surrender to the superior forces of nature. His military career was at an end.
Shifting his position, his eyes fell upon some outbuildings
which had an oddly familiar appearance, as if he had dreamed
of them. He stood considering them with wonder, when suddenly the entire plantation, with its inclosing forest, seemed to
turn as if upon a pivot. His little world swung half around; the
points of the compass were reversed. He recognized the blazing building as his own home!
For a moment he stood stupefied by the power of the revelation, then ran with stumbling feet, making a half-circuit of the
ruin. There, conspicuous in the light of the conflagration, lay
the dead body of a woman—the white face turned upward, the
hands thrown out and clutched full of grass, the clothing deranged, the long dark hair in tangles and full of clotted blood.
The greater part of the forehead was torn away, and from the
jagged hole the brain protruded, overflowing the temple, a frothy
mass of gray, crowned with clusters of crimson bubbles—the
work of a shell.
The child moved his little hands, making wild, uncertain
gestures. He uttered a series of inarticulate and indescribable
cries—something between the chattering of an ape and the
gobbling of a turkey—a startling, soulless, unholy sound, the
language of a devil. The child was a deaf mute.
Then he stood motionless, with quivering lips, looking
down upon the wreck.