Five days a week, for thirty-six years, I have travelled the eight-twelve train to the City. It is never
unduly crowded, and it takes me right into Cannon Street Station, only an eleven and a half minute
walk from the door of my office in Austin Friars.
I have always liked the process of commuting; every phase of the little journey is a pleasure to me.
There is a regularity about it that is agreeable and comforting to a person of habit, and in addition, it
serves as a sort of slipway along which I am gently but firmly launched into the waters of daily
business routine.
Ours is a smallish country station and only nineteen or twenty people gather there to catch the eighttwelve. We are a group that rarely changes, and when occasionally a new face appears on the
platform it causes a certain disclamatory, protestant ripple, like a new bird in a cage of canaries.
But normally, when I arrive in the morning with my usual four minutes to spare, there they all are,
good, solid, steadfast people, standing in their right places with their right umbrellas and hats and ties
and faces and their newspapers under their arms, as unchanged and unchangeable through the years as
the furniture in my own living-room. I like that.
I like also my corner seat by the window and reading The Times to the noise and motion of the
train. This part of it lasts thirty-two minutes and it seems to soothe both my brain and my fretful old
body like a good long massage. Believe me, there’s nothing like routine and regularity for preserving
one’s peace of mind. I have now made this morning journey nearly ten thousand times in all, and I
enjoy it more and more every day. Also (irrelevant, but interesting), I have become a sort of clock. I
can tell at once if we are running two, three, or four minutes late, and I never have to look up to know
which station we are stopped at.
The walk at the other end from Cannon Street to my office is neither too long nor too short – a
healthy little perambulation along streets crowded with fellow commuters all proceeding to their
places of work on the same orderly schedule as myself. It gives me a sense of assurance to be moving
among these dependable, dignified people who stick to their jobs and don’t go gadding about all over
the world. Their lives, like my own, are regulated nicely by the minute hand of an accurate watch, and
very often our paths cross at the same times and places on the street each day.
For example, as I turn the corner into St Swithin’s Lane, I invariably come head on with a genteel
middle-aged lady who wears silver pince-nez and carries a black brief-case in her hand – a first-rate
accountant, I should say, or possibly an executive in the textile industry. When I cross over
Threadneedle Street by the traffic lights, nine times out of ten I pass a gentleman who wears a
different garden flower in his buttonhole each day. He dresses in black trousers and grey spats and is
clearly a punctual and meticulous person, probably a banker, or perhaps a solicitor like myself; and
several times in the last twenty-five years, as we have hurried past one another across the street, our
eyes have met in a fleeting glance of mutual approval and respect.
At least half the faces I pass on this little walk are now familiar to me. And good faces they are
too, my kind of faces, my kind of people – sound, sedulous, businesslike folk with none of that
restlessness and glittering eye about them that you see in all these so-called clever types who want to
tip the world upside-down with their Labour Governments and socialized medicines and all the rest
of it.
So you can see that I am, in every sense of the words, a contented commuter. Or would it be more
accurate to say that I was a contented commuter? At the time when I wrote the little autobiographical
sketch you have just read – intending to circulate it among the staff of my office as an exhortation and
an example – I was giving a perfectly true account of my feelings. But that was a whole week ago,
and since then something rather peculiar has happened. As a matter of fact, it started to happen last
Tuesday, the very morning that I was carrying the rough draft up to Town in my pocket; and this, to
me, was so timely and coincidental that I can only believe it to have been the work of God. God had
read my little essay and he had said to himself, ‘This man Perkins is becoming over-complacent. It is
high time I taught him a lesson.’ I honestly believe that’s what happened.
As I say, it was last Tuesday, the Tuesday after Easter, a warm yellow spring morning, and I was
striding on to the platform of our small country station with The Times tucked under my arm and the
draft of ‘The Contented Commuter’ in my pocket, when I immediately became aware that something
was wrong. I could actually feel that curious little ripple of protest running along the ranks of my
fellow commuters. I stopped and glanced around.
The stranger was standing plumb in the middle of the platform, feet apart and arms folded, looking
for all the world as though he owned the whole place. He was a biggish, thickset man, and even from
behind he somehow managed to convey a powerful impression of arrogance and oil. Very definitely,
he was not one of us. He carried a cane instead of an umbrella, his shoes were brown instead of
black, the grey hat was cocked at a ridiculous angle, and in one way and another there seemed to be
an excess of silk and polish about his person. More than this I did not care to observe. I walked
straight past him with my face to the sky, adding, I sincerely hope, a touch of real frost to an
atmosphere that was already cool.
The train came in. And now, try if you can to imagine my horror when the new man actually
followed me into my own compartment! Nobody had done this to me for fifteen years. My colleagues
always respect my seniority. One of my special little pleasures is to have the place to myself for at
least one, sometimes two or even three stations. But here, if you please, was this fellow, this stranger,
straddling the seat opposite and blowing his nose and rustling the Daily Mail and lighting a disgusting
pipe.
I lowered my Times and stole a glance at his face. I suppose he was about the same age as me –
sixty-two or three – but he had one of those unpleasantly handsome, brown, leathery countenances that
you see nowadays in advertisements for men’s shirts – the lion shooter and the polo player and the
Everest climber and the tropical explorer and the racing yachtsman all rolled into one; dark
eyebrows, steely eyes, strong white teeth clamping the stem of a pipe. Personally, I mistrust all
handsome men. The superficial pleasures of this life come too easily to them, and they seem to walk
the world as though they themselves were personally responsible for their own good looks. I don’t
mind a woman being pretty. That’s different. But in a man, I’m sorry, but somehow or other I find it
downright offensive. Anyway, here was this one sitting right opposite me in the carriage, and I was
looking at him over the top of my Times when suddenly he glanced up and our eyes met.
‘D’you mind the pipe?’ he asked, holding it up in his fingers. That was all he said. But the sound of
his voice had a sudden and extraordinary effect upon me. In fact, I think I jumped. Then I sort of froze
up and sat staring at him for at least a minute before I got hold of myself and made an answer.
‘This is a smoker,’ I said, ‘so you may do as you please.’
‘I just thought I’d ask.’
There it was again, that curiously crisp, familiar voice, clipping its words and spitting them out
very hard and small like a little quick-firing gun shooting out raspberry seeds. Where had I heard it
before, and why did every word seem to strike upon some tiny tender spot far back in my memory?
Good heavens, I thought. Pull yourself together. What sort of nonsense is this?
The stranger returned to his paper. I pretended to do the same. But by this time I was properly put
out and I couldn’t concentrate at all. Instead, I kept stealing glances at him over the top of the editorial
page. It was really an intolerable face, vulgarly, almost lasciviously handsome, with an oily salacious
sheen all over the skin. But had I or had I not seen it before some time in my life? I began to think I
had, because now, even when I looked at it I felt a peculiar kind of discomfort that I cannot quite
describe – something to do with pain and with violence, perhaps even with fear.
We spoke no more during the journey, but you can well imagine that by then my whole routine had
been thoroughly upset. My day was ruined; and more than one of my clerks at the office felt the
sharper edge of my tongue, particularly after luncheon when my digestion started acting up on me as
well.
The next morning, there he was again standing in the middle of the platform with his cane and his
pipe and his silk scarf and his nauseatingly handsome face. I walked past him and approached a
certain Mr Grummitt, a stockbroker who has been commuting with me for over twenty-eight years. I
can’t say I’ve ever had an actual conversation with him before – we are rather a reserved lot on our
station – but a crisis like this will usually break the ice.
‘Grummitt,’ I whispered. ‘Who’s this bounder?’
‘Search me,’ Grummitt said.
‘Pretty unpleasant.’
‘Very.’
‘Not going to be a regular, I trust.’
‘Oh God,’ Grummitt said.
Then the train came in.
This time, to my relief, the man got into another compartment.
But the following morning I had him with me again.
‘Well,’ he said, settling back in the seat directly opposite. ‘It’s a topping day.’ And once again I
felt that slow uneasy stirring of the memory, stronger than ever this time, closer to the surface but not
yet quite within my reach.
Then came Friday, the last day of the week. I remember it had rained as I drove to the station, but it
was one of those warm sparkling April showers that last only five or six minutes, and when I walked
on to the platform, all the umbrellas were rolled up and the sun was shining and there were big white
clouds floating in the sky. In spite of this, I felt depressed. There was no pleasure in this journey for
me any longer. I knew the stranger would be there. And sure enough, he was, standing with his legs
apart just as though he owned the place, and this time swinging his cane casually back and forth
through the air.
The cane! That did it! I stopped like I’d been shot.
‘It’s Foxley!’ I cried under my breath. ‘Galloping Foxley! And still swinging his cane!’
I stepped closer to get a better look. I tell you I’ve never had such a shock in all my life. It was
Foxley all right. Bruce Foxley or Galloping Foxley as we used to call him. And the last time I’d seen
him, let me see – it was at school and I was no more than twelve or thirteen years old.
At that point the train came in, and heaven help me if he didn’t get into my compartment once again.
He put his hat and cane up on the rack, then turned and sat down and began lighting his pipe. He
glanced up at me through the smoke with those rather small cold eyes and he said, ‘Ripping day, isn’t
it. Just like summer.’
There was no mistaking the voice now. It hadn’t changed at all. Except that the things I had been
used to hearing it say were different.
‘All right, Perkins,’ it used to say. ‘All right, you nasty little boy. I am about to beat you again.’
How long ago was that? It must be nearly fifty years. Extraordinary, though, how little the features
had altered. Still the same arrogant tilt of the chin, the flaring nostrils, the contemptuous staring eyes
that were too small and a shade too close together for comfort; still the same habit of thrusting his
face forward at you, impinging on you, pushing you into a corner; and even the hair I could remember
– coarse and slightly wavy, with just a trace of oil all over it, like a well-tossed salad. He used to
keep a bottle of green hair mixture on the side table in his study – when you have to dust a room you
get to know and to hate all the objects in it – and this bottle had the royal coat of arms on the label and
the name of a shop in Bond Street, and under that, in small print, it said ‘By Appointment –
Hairdressers To His Majesty King Edward VII.’ I can remember that particularly because it seemed
so funny that a shop should want to boast about being hairdresser to someone who was practically
bald – even a monarch.
And now I watched Foxley settle back in his seat and begin reading the paper. It was a curious
sensation, sitting only a yard away from this man who fifty years before had made me so miserable
that I had once contemplated suicide. He hadn’t recognized me; there wasn’t much danger of that
because of my moustache. I felt fairly sure I was safe and could sit there and watch him all I wanted.
Looking back on it, there seems little doubt that I suffered very badly at the hands of Bruce Foxley
my first year in school, and strangely enough, the unwitting cause of it all was my father. I was twelve
and a half when I first went off to this fine old public school. That was, let me see, in 1907. My
father, who wore a silk topper and morning coat, escorted me to the station, and I can remember how
we were standing on the platform among piles of wooden tuck-boxes and trunks and what seemed like
thousands of very large boys milling about and talking and shouting at one another, when suddenly
somebody who was wanting to get by us gave my father a great push from behind and nearly knocked
him off his feet.
My father, who was a small, courteous, dignified person, turned around with surprising speed and
seized the culprit by the wrist.
‘Don’t they teach you better manners than that at this school, young man?’ he said.
The boy, at least a head taller than my father, looked down at him with a cold, arrogant-laughing
glare, and said nothing.
‘It seems to me,’ my father said, staring back at him, ‘that an apology would be in order.’
But the boy just kept on looking down his nose at my father with this funny little arrogant smile at
the corners of his mouth, and his chin kept coming further and further out.
‘You strike me as being an impudent and ill-mannered boy,’ my father went on. ‘And I can only
pray that you are an exception in your school. I would not wish for any son of mine to pick up such
habits.’
At this point, the big boy inclined his head slightly in my direction, and a pair of small, cold, rather
close together eyes looked down into mine. I was not particularly frightened at the time; I knew
nothing about the power of senior boys over junior boys at public schools; and I can remember that I
looked straight back at him in support of my father, whom I adored and respected.
When my father started to say something more, the boy simply turned away and sauntered slowly
down the platform into the crowd.
Bruce Foxley never forgot this episode; and of course the really unlucky thing about it for me was
that when I arrived at school I found myself in the same ‘house’ as him. Even worse than that – I was
in his study. He was doing his last year, and he was a prefect – ‘a boazer’ we called it – and as such
he was officially permitted to beat any of the fags in the house. But being in his study, I automatically
became his own particular, personal slave. I was his valet and cook and maid and errand-boy, and it
was my duty to see that he never lifted a finger for himself unless absolutely necessary. In no society
that I know of in the world is a servant imposed upon to the extent that we wretched little fags were
imposed upon by the boazers at school. In frosty or snowy weather I even had to sit on the seat of the
lavatory (which was in an unheated outhouse) every morning after breakfast to warm it before Foxley
came along.
I could remember how he used to saunter across the room in his loose-jointed, elegant way, and if
a chair were in his path he would knock it aside and I would have to run over and pick it up. He wore
silk shirts and always had a silk handkerchief tucked up his sleeve, and his shoes were made by
someone called Lobb (who also had a royal crest). They were pointed shoes, and it was my duty to
rub the leather with a bone for fifteen minutes each day to make it shine.
But the worst memories of all had to do with the changing room.
I could see myself now, a small pale shrimp of a boy standing just inside the door of this huge room
in my pyjamas and bedroom slippers and brown camel-hair dressing-gown. A single bright electric
bulb was hanging on a flex from the ceiling, and all around the walls the black and yellow football
shirts with their sweaty smell filling the room, and the voice, the clipped, pip-spitting voice was
saying, ‘So which is it to be this time? Six with the dressing-gown on – or four with it off?’
I never could bring myself to answer this question. I would simply stand there staring down at the
dirty floor-planks, dizzy with fear and unable to think of anything except that this other larger boy
would soon start smashing away at me with his long, thin, white stick, slowly, scientifically, skilfully,
legally, and with apparent relish, and I would bleed. Five hours earlier, I had failed to get the fire to
light in his study. I had spent my pocket money on a box of special firelighters and I had held a
newspaper across the chimney opening to make a draught and I had knelt down in front of it and
blown my guts out into the bottom of the grate; but the coals would not burn.
‘If you’re too obstinate to answer,’ the voice was saying, ‘then I’ll have to decide for you.’
I wanted desperately to answer because I knew which one I had to choose. It’s the first thing you
learn when you arrive. Always keep the dressing-gown on and take the extra strokes. Otherwise
you’re almost certain to get cut. Even three with it on is better than one with it off.
‘Take it off then and get into the far corner and touch your toes. I’m going to give you four.’
Slowly I would take it off and lay it on the ledge above the boot-lockers. And slowly I would walk
over to the far corner, cold and naked now in my cotton pyjamas, treading softly and seeing
everything around me suddenly very bright and flat and far away, like a magic lantern picture, and
very big, and very unreal, and sort of swimming through the water in my eyes.
‘Go on and touch your toes. Tighter – much tighter than that.’
Then he would walk down to the far end of the changing-room and I would be watching him upside
down between my legs, and he would disappear through a doorway that led down two steps into what
we called ‘the basin-passage’. This was a stone-floored corridor with wash basins along one wall,
and beyond it was the bathroom. When Foxley disappeared I knew he was walking down to the far
end of the basin-passage. Foxley always did that. Then, in the distance, but echoing loud among the
basins and the tiles, I would hear the noise of his shoes on the stone floor as he started galloping
forward, and through my legs I would see him leaping up the two steps into the changing-room and
come bounding towards me with his face thrust forward and the cane held high in the air. This was the
moment when I shut my eyes and waited for the crack and told myself that whatever happened I must
not straighten up.
Anyone who has been properly beaten will tell you that the real pain does not come until about
eight or ten seconds after the stroke. The stroke itself is merely a loud crack and a sort of blunt thud
against your backside, numbing you completely (I’m told a bullet wound does the same). But later on,
oh my heavens, it feels as if someone is laying a red hot poker right across your naked buttocks and it
is absolutely impossible to prevent yourself from reaching back and clutching it with your fingers.
Foxley knew all about this time lag, and the slow walk back over a distance that must altogether
have been fifteen yards gave each stroke plenty of time to reach the peak of its pain before the next
one was delivered.
On the fourth stroke I would invariably straighten up. I couldn’t help it. It was an automatic defence
reaction from a body that had had as much as it could stand.
‘You flinched,’ Foxley would say. ‘That one doesn’t count. Go on – down you get.’
The next time I would remember to grip my ankles.
Afterwards he would watch me as I walked over – very stiff now and holding my backside – to put
on my dressing-gown, but I would always try to keep turned away from him so he couldn’t see my
face. And when I went out, it would be, ‘Hey, you! Come back!’
I was in the passage then, and I would stop and turn and stand in the doorway, waiting.
‘Come here. Come on, come back here. Now – haven’t you forgotten something?’
All I could think of at that moment was the excruciating burning pain in my behind.
‘You strike me as being an impudent and ill-mannered boy,’ he would say, imitating my father’s
voice. ‘Don’t they teach you better manners than that at this school?’
‘Thank … you,’ I would stammer. ‘Thank … you … for the beating.’
And then back up the dark stairs to the dormitory and it became much better then because it was all
over and the pain was going and the others were clustering round and treating me with a certain rough
sympathy born of having gone through the same thing themselves, many times.
‘Hey, Perkins, let’s have a look.’
‘How many d’you get?’
‘Five, wasn’t it? We heard them easily from here.’
‘Come on, man. Let’s see the marks.’
I would take down my pyjamas and stand there while this group of experts solemnly examined the
damage.
‘Rather far apart, aren’t they? Not quite up to Foxley’s usual standard.’
‘Two of them are close. Actually touching. Look – these two are beauties!’
‘That low one was a rotten shot.’
‘Did he go right down the basin-passage to start his run?’
‘You got an extra one for flinching, didn’t you?’
‘By golly, old Foxley’s really got it in for you, Perkins.’
‘Bleeding a bit too. Better wash it, you know.’
Then the door would open and Foxley would be there, and everyone would scatter and pretend to
be doing his teeth or saying his prayers while I was left standing in the centre of the room with my
pants down.
‘What’s going on here?’ Foxley would say, taking a quick look at his own handiwork. ‘You –
Perkins! Put your pyjamas on properly and get to bed.’
And that was the end of a day.
Through the week, I never had a moment of time to myself. If Foxley saw me in the study taking up
a novel or perhaps opening my stamp album, he would immediately find something for me to do. One
of his favourites, especially when it was raining outside, was, ‘Oh, Perkins, I think a bunch of wild
irises would look rather nice on my desk, don’t you?’
Wild irises grew only around Orange Ponds. Orange Ponds was two miles down the road and half
a mile across the fields. I would get up from my chair, put on my raincoat and my straw hat, take my
umbrella – my brolly – and set off on this long and lonely trek. The straw hat had to be worn at all
times outdoors, but it was easily destroyed by rain; therefore the brolly was necessary to protect the
hat. On the other hand, you can’t keep a brolly over your head while scrambling about on a woody
bank looking for irises, so to save my hat from ruin I would put it on the ground under my brolly while
I searched for flowers. In this way, I caught many colds.
But the most dreaded day was Sunday. Sunday was for cleaning the study, and how well I can
remember the terror of those mornings, the frantic dusting and scrubbing, and then the waiting for
Foxley to come in to inspect.
‘Finished?’ he would ask.
‘I … I think so.’
Then he would stroll over to the drawer of his desk and take out a single white glove, fitting it
slowly on to his right hand, pushing each finger well home, and I would stand there watching and
trembling as he moved around the room running his white-gloved forefinger along the picture tops, the
skirting, the shelves, the window sills, the lamp shades. I never took my eyes off that finger. For me it
was an instrument of doom. Nearly always, it managed to discover some tiny crack that I had
overlooked or perhaps hadn’t even thought about; and when this happened Foxley would turn slowly
around, smiling that dangerous little smile that wasn’t a smile, holding up the white finger so that I
should see for myself the thin smudge of dust that lay along the side of it.
‘Well,’ he would say. ‘So you’re a lazy little boy. Aren’t you?’
No answer.
‘Aren’t you?’
‘I thought I dusted it all.’
‘Are you or are you not a nasty, lazy little boy?’
‘Y-yes.’
‘But your father wouldn’t want you to grow up like that, would he? Your father is very particular
about manners, is he not?’
No answer.
‘I asked you, is your father particular about manners?’
‘Perhaps – yes.’
‘Therefore I will be doing him a favour if I punish you, won’t I?’
‘I don’t know.’
‘Won’t I?’
‘Y-yes.’
‘We will meet later then, after prayers, in the changing-room.’
The rest of the day would be spent in an agony of waiting for the evening to come.
Oh my goodness, how it was all coming back to me now. Sunday was also letter-writing time.
‘Dear Mummy and Daddy – thank you very much for your letter. I hope you are both well. I am,
except I have got a cold because I got caught in the rain but it will soon be over. Yesterday we played
Shrewsbury and beat them 4–2. I watched and Foxley who you know is the head of our house scored
one of our goals. Thank you very much for the cake. With love from William.’
I usually went to the lavatory to write my letter, or to the boothole, or the bathroom – any place out
of Foxley’s way. But I had to watch the time. Tea was at four-thirty and Foxley’s toast had to be
ready. Every day I had to make toast for Foxley, and on weekdays there were no fires allowed in the
studies, so all the fags, each making toast for his own studyholder, would have to crowd around the
one small fire in the library, jockeying for position with his toasting-fork. Under these conditions, I
still had to see that Foxley’s toast was (1) very crisp, (2) not burned at all, (3) hot and ready exactly
on time. To fail in any one of these requirements was a ‘beatable offence’.
‘Hey, you! What’s this?’
‘It’s toast.’
‘Is this really your idea of toast?’
‘Well …’
‘You’re too idle to make it right, aren’t you?’
‘I try to make it.’
‘You know what they do to an idle horse, Perkins?’
‘No.’
‘Are you a horse?’
‘No.’
‘Well – anyway, you’re an ass – ha, ha – so I think you qualify. I’ll be seeing you later.’
Oh, the agony of those days. To burn Foxley’s toast was a ‘beatable offence’. So was forgetting to
take the mud off Foxley’s football boots. So was failing to hang up Foxley’s football clothes. So was
rolling up Foxley’s brolly the wrong way round. So was banging the study door when Foxley was
working. So was filling Foxley’s bath too hot for him. So was not cleaning the buttons properly on
Foxley’s OTC uniform. So was making those blue metal-polish smudges on the uniform itself. So was
failing to shine the soles of Foxley’s shoes. So was leaving Foxley’s study untidy at any time. In fact,
so far as Foxley was concerned, I was practically a beatable offence myself.
I glanced out of the window. My goodness, we were nearly there. I must have been dreaming away
like this for quite a while, and I hadn’t even opened my Times. Foxley was still leaning back in the
corner seat opposite me reading his Daily Mail, and through a cloud of blue smoke from his pipe I
could see the top half of his face over the newspaper, the small bright eyes, the corrugated forehead,
the wavy, slightly oily hair.
Looking at him now, after all that time, was a peculiar and rather exciting experience. I knew he
was no longer dangerous, but the old memories were still there and I didn’t feel altogether
comfortable in his presence. It was something like being inside the cage with a tame tiger.
What nonsense is this? I asked myself. Don’t be so stupid. My heavens, if you wanted to you could
go ahead and tell him exactly what you thought of him and he couldn’t touch you. Hey – that was an
idea!
Except that – well – after all, was it worth it? I was too old for that sort of thing now, and I wasn’t
sure that I really felt much anger towards him anyway.
So what should I do? I couldn’t sit there staring at him like an idiot.
At that point, a little impish fancy began to take a hold of me. What I would like to do, I told
myself, would be to lean across and tap him lightly on the knee and tell him who I was. Then I would
watch his face. After that, I would begin talking about our schooldays together, making it just loud
enough for the other people in the carriage to hear. I would remind him playfully of some of the things
he used to do to me, and perhaps even describe the changing-room beatings so as to embarrass him a
trifle. A bit of teasing and discomfort wouldn’t do him any harm. And it would do me an awful lot of
good.
Suddenly he glanced up and caught me staring at him. It was the second time this had happened, and
I noticed a flicker of irritation in his eyes.
All right, I told myself. Here we go. But keep it pleasant and sociable and polite. It’ll be much
more effective that way, more embarrassing for him.
So I smiled at him and gave him a courteous little nod. Then, raising my voice, I said, ‘I do hope
you’ll excuse me. I’d like to introduce myself.’ I was leaning forward watching him closely so as not
to miss the reaction. ‘My name is Perkins – William Perkins – and I was at Repton in 1907.’
The others in the carriage were sitting very still, and I could sense that they were all listening and
waiting to see what would happen next.
‘I’m glad to meet you,’ he said, lowering the paper to his lap. ‘Mine’s Fortescue – Jocelyn
Fortescue, Eton 1916.’