They got out of the car and went in the front door of Mr Hoddy's house.
"I've an idea Dad's going to question you rather sharp tonight," Glance
whispered.
"About what, Glance?"
"The usual stuff. Jobs and things like that. And whether you can support me
in a fitting way."
"Jackie's going to do that," Claud said. "When Jackie wins there won't be
any need for any jobs... "Don't you ever mention Jackie to my dad, Claud Cubbage,
or that'll be the end of it. If there's one thing in the world he can't abide it's
greyhounds. Don't you ever forget that."
"Oh Christ," Claud said.
"Tell him something else anything--anything to make him happy, see?" And
with that she led Claud into the parlour.
Mr Hoddy was a widower, a man with a prim sour mouth and an expression of
eternal disapproval all over his face. He had the small, close-together teeth of
his daughter Glance, the same suspicious, inward look about the eyes, but none of
her freshness and vitality, none of her warmth. He was a small sour apple of a
man, grey-skinned and shrivelled, with a dozen or so surviving strands of black
hair pasted across the dome of his bald head. But a very superior man was Mr
Hoddy, a grocer's assistant, one who wore a spotless white gown at his work, who
handled large quantities of such precious commodities as butter and sugar, who was
deferred to, even smiled at by every housewife in the village.
Claud Cubbage was never quite at his ease in this house and that was
precisely as Mr Hoddy intended it. They were sitting round the fire in the parlour
with cups of tea in their hands, Mr Hoddy in the best chair to the right of the
fireplace, Claud and Glance on the sofa, decorously separated by a wide space. The
younger daughter, Ada, was on a hard upright chair to the left, and they made a
little circle round the fire, a stiff, tense little circle, primly tea-sipping.
"Yes, Mr Hoddy," Claud was saying, "you can be quite sure both Gordon and
me's got quite a number of nice little ideas up our sleeves this very moment. It's
only a question of taking our time and making sure which is going to be the most
profitable."
"What sort of ideas?" Mr Hoddy asked, fixing Claud with his small,
disapproving eyes.
"Ah, there you are now. That's it, you see." Claud shifted uncomfortably on
the sofa. His blue lounge suit was tight around his chest, and it was especially
tight between his legs, up in the crutch. The tightness in his crutch was actually
painful to him and he wanted terribly to hitch it downward.
"This man you call Gordon, I thought he had a profitable business out there
as it is," Mr Hoddy said. "Why does he want to change?"
"Absolutely right, Mr Hoddy. It's a firstrate business. But it's a good
thing to keep expanding, see. New ideas is what we're after. Something I can come
in on as well and take a share of the profits."
"Such as what?"
Mr Hoddy was eating a slice of currant cake, nibbling it round the edges,
and his small mouth was like the mouth of a caterpillar biting a tiny curved slice
out of the edge of a leaf.
"Such as what?" he asked again.
"There's long conferences, Mr Hoddy, takes place every day between Gordon
and me about these different matters of business."
"Such as what?" he repeated, relentless.
Glance glanced sideways at Claud, encouraging. Claud turned his large slow
eyes upon Mr Hoddy, and he was silent. He wished Mr Hoddy wouldn't push him around
like this, always shooting questions at him and glaring at him and acting just
exactly like he was the bloody adjutant or something.
"Such as what?" Mr Hoddy said, and this time Claud knew that he was not
going to let go. Also, his instinct warned him that the old man was trying to
create a crisis.
"Well now," he said, breathing deep. "I don't really want to go into details
until we got it properly worked out. All we're doing so far is turning our ideas
over in our minds, see."
"All I'm asking," Mr Hoddy said irritably, "is what sort of business are you
contemplating? I presume that it's respectable?"
"Now please, Mr Hoddy. You don't for one moment think we'd even so much as
consider anything that wasn't absolutely and entirely respectable, do you?"
Mr Hoddy grunted, stirring his tea slowly, watching Claud. Glance sat mute
and fearful on the sofa, gazing into the fire.
"I've never been in favour of starting a business," Mr Hoddy pronounced,
defending his own failure in that line. "A good respectable job is all a man
should wish for. A respectable job in respectable surroundings. Too much hokeypokey in business for my liking."
"The thing is this," Claud said, desperate now. "All I want is to provide my
wife with everything she can possibly desire. A house to live in and furniture and
a flower garden and a washing-machine and all the best things in the world. That's
what I want to do, and you can't do that on an ordinary wage, now can you? It's
impossible to get enough money to do that unless you go into business, Mr Hoddy.
You'll surely agree with me there?"
Mr Hoddy, who had worked for an ordinary wage all his life, didn't much like
this point of view.
"And don't you think I provide everything my family wants, might I ask?"
"Oh, yes, and more!" Claud cried fervently. "But you've got a very superior
job, Mr Hoddy, and that makes all the difference."
"But what sort of business are you thinking of?" the man persisted.
Claud sipped his tea to give himself a little more time and he couldn't help
wondering how the miserable old bastard's face would look if he simply up and told
him the truth right there and then, if he'd said what we've got Mr Hoddy, if you
really wants to know, is a couple of greyhounds and one's a perfect ringer for the
other and we're going to bring off the biggest goddam gamble in the history of
flapping, see. He'd like to watch the old bastard's face if he said that, he
really would.
They were all waiting for him to proceed now, sitting there with cups of tea
in their hands staring at him and waiting for him to say something good. "Well,"
he said, speaking very slowly because he was thinking deep. "I've been pondering
something a long time now, something as'll make more money even than Gordon's
secondhand cars or anything else come to that, and practically no expense
involved." That's better, he told himself. Keep going along like that.
"And what might that be?"
"Something so queer, Mr Hoddy, there isn't one in a million would even
believe it."
"Well, what is it?" Mr Hoddy placed his cup carefully on the little table
beside him and leaned forward to listen. And Claud, watching him, knew more than
ever that this man and all those like him were his enemies. It was the Mr Hoddys
were the trouble. They were all the same. He knew them all, with their clean ugly
hands, their grey skin, their acrid mouths, their tendency to develop little round
bulging bellies just below the waistcoat; and always the unctuous curl of the
nose, the weak chin, the suspicious eyes that were dark and moved too quick. The
Mr Hoddys. Oh, Christ.
"Well, what is it?"
"It's an absolute gold-mine, Mr Hoddy, honestly it is."
"I'll believe that when I hear it."
"It's a thing so simple and amazing most people wouldn't even bother to do
it." He had it now--something he had actually been thinking seriously about for a
long time, something he'd always wanted to do. He leaned across and put his teacup
carefully on the table beside Mr Hoddy's, then, not knowing what to do with his
hands, placed them on his knees, palms downward.
"Well, come on man, what is it?"
"It's maggots," Claud answered softly.
Mr Hoddy jerked back as though someone had squirted water in his face.
"Maggots!" he said, aghast. "Maggots? What on earth do you mean, maggots?" Claud
had forgotten that this word was almost unmentionable in any selfrespecting
grocer's shop. Ada began to giggle, but Clarice glanced at her so malignantly the
giggle died on her mouth.
"That's where the money is, starting a maggot factory."
"Are you trying to be funny?"
"Honestly, Mr Hoddy, it may sound a bit queer, and that's simply because you
never heard it before, but it's a little gold-mine."
"A maggot-factory! Really now, Cubbage! Please be sensible!"
Glance wished her father wouldn't call him Cubbage.
"You never heard speak of a maggot-factory, Mr Hoddy?"
"I certainly have not!"
"There's maggot-factories going now, real big companies with managers and
directors and all, and you know what, Mr Hoddy? They're making millions!"
"Nonsense, man."
"And you know why they're making millions?" Claud paused, but he did not
notice now that his listener's face was slowly turning yellow. "It's because of
the enormous demand for maggots, Mr Hoddy."
At that moment Mr Hoddy was listening also to other voices, the voices of
his customers across the counter--Mrs Rabbits, for instance, as he sliced off her
ration of butter, Mrs Rabbits with her brown moustache and always talking so loud
and saying well, well, well; he could hear her now saying "Well, well, well Mr
Hoddy, so your Clarice got married last week, did she. Very nice too, I must say,
and what was it you said her husband does, Mr Hoddy?"
He owns a maggot-factory, Mrs Rabbits.
No, thank you, he told himself, watching Claud with his small, hostile eyes.
No thank you very much indeed. I don't want that.
"I can't say," he announced primly, "that I myself have ever had occasion to
purchase a maggot."
"Now you come to mention it, Mr Hoddy, nor have I. Nor has many other people
we know. But let me ask you something else. How many times you have occasion to
purchase... a crown wheel and pinion, for instance?"
This was a shrewd question and Claud permitted himself a slow mawkish smile.
"What's that got to do with maggots?"
"Exactly this--that certain people buy certain things, see. You never bought
a crown wheel and pinion in your life, but that don't say there isn't men getting
rich this very moment making them--because there is. It's the same with maggots!"
"Would you mind telling me who these unpleasant people are who buy maggots?"
"Maggots are bought by fishermen, Mr Hoddy. Amateur fishermen. There's
thousands and thousands of fishermen all over the country going out every week-end
fishing the rivers and all of them wanting maggots. Willing to pay good money for
them, too. You go along the river there anywhere you like above Marlow on a Sunday
and you'll see them lining the banks. Sitting there one beside the other simply
lining the banks of both sides."
"Those men don't buy maggots. They go down the bottom of the garden and dig
worms."
"Now that's just where you're wrong, Mr Hoddy, if you'll allow me to say so.
That's just where you're absolutely wrong. They want maggots, not worms."
"In that case they get their own maggots."
"They don't want to get their own maggots. Just imagine Mr Hoddy, it's
Saturday afternoon and you're going out fishing and a nice clean tin of maggots
arrives by post and all you've got to do is slip it in the fishing bag and away
you go. You don't think fellers is going out digging for worms and hunting for
maggots when they can have them delivered right to their very doorsteps like that
just for a bob or two, do you?"
"And might I ask how you propose to run this maggot-factory of yours?" When
he spoke the word maggot, it seemed as if he were spitting out a sour little pip
from his mouth.
"Easiest thing in the world to run a maggotfactory." Claud was gaining
confidence now and warming to his subject. "All you need is a couple of old oil
drums and a few lumps of rotten meat or a sheep's head, and you put them in the
oil drums and that's all you do. The flies do the rest."
Had he been watching Mr Hoddy's face he would probably have stopped there.
"Of course, it's not quite as easy as it sounds. What you've got to do next
is feed up your maggots with special diet. Bran and milk. And then when they get
big and fat you put them in pint tins and post them off to your customers. Five
shillings a pint they fetch. Five shillings a pint!" he cried, slapping the knee.
"You just imagine that, Mr Hoddy! And they say one bluebottle'!! lay twenty pints
easy!"
He paused again, but merely to marshal his thoughts, for there was no
stopping him now. "And there's another thing, Mr Hoddy. A good maggot-factory
don't just breed ordinary maggots, you know. Every fisherman's got his own tastes.
Maggots are commonest, but also there's lug worms. Some fishermen won't have
nothing but lug worms. And of course there's coloured maggots. Ordinary maggots
are white, but you get them all sorts of different colours by feeding them special
foods, see. Red ones and green ones and black ones and you can even get blue ones
if you know what to feed them. The most difficult thing of all in a maggot-factory
is a blue maggot, Mr Hoddy."
Claud stopped to catch his breath. He was having a vision now--the same
vision that accompanied all his dreams of wealth--of an immense factory building
with tall chimneys and hundreds of happy workers streaming in through the wide
wrought-iron gates and Claud himself sitting in his luxurious office directing
operations with a calm and splendid assurance.
"There's people with brains studying these things this very minute," he went
on. "So you got to jump in quick unless you want to get left out in the cold.
That's the secret of big business, jumping in quick before all the others, Mr
Hoddy."
Glance, Ada, and the father sat absolutely still looking straight ahead.
None of them moved or spoke. Only Claud rushed on.
"Just so long as you make sure your maggots is alive when you post 'em.
They've got to be wiggling, see. Maggots is no good unless they're wiggling. And
when we really get going, when we've built up a little capital, then we'll put up
some glasshouses."
Another pause, and Claud stroked his chin. "Now I expect you're all
wondering why a person should want glasshouses in a maggotfactory. Well--I'll tell
you. It's for the flies in the winter, see. Most important to take care of your
flies in the winter."
"I think that's enough, thank you, Cubbage," Mr Hoddy said suddenly.
Claud looked up and for the first time he saw the expression on the man's
face. It stopped him cold.
"I don't want to hear any more about it," Mr Hoddy said.
"All I'm trying to do, Mr Hoddy," Claud cried, "is give your little girl
everything she can possibly desire. That's all I'm thinking of night and day, Mr
Hoddy."
"Then all I hope is you'll be able to do it without the help of maggots."
"Dad!" Glance cried, alarmed. "I simply won't have you talking to Claud like
that."
"I'll talk to him how I wish, thank you Miss."
"I think it's time I was getting along," Claud saidd. "Good night."
