PARKER’S wife was sitting on the front porch floor, snapping beans. Parker was
sitting on the step, some distance away, watching her sullenly. She was plain, plain.
The skin on her face was thin and drawn as tight as the skin on an onion and her eyes
were gray and sharp like the points of two icepicks. Parker understood why he had
married her — he couldn’t have got her any other way — but he couldn’t understand
why he stayed with her now. She was pregnant and pregnant women were not his
favorite kind. Nevertheless, he stayed as if she had him conjured. He was puzzled and
ashamed of himself.
The house they rented sat alone save for a single tall pecan tree on a high
embankment overlooking a highway. At intervals a car would shoot past below and his
wife’s eyes would swerve suspiciously after the sound of it and then come back to rest
on the newspaper full of beans in her lap. One of the things she did not approve of
was automobiles. In addition to her other bad qualities, she was forever sniffing up
sin. She did not smoke or dip, drink whiskey, use bad language or paint her face, and
God knew some paint would have improved it, Parker thought. Her being against
color, it was the more remarkable she had married him. Sometimes he supposed that
she had married him because she meant to save him. At other times he had a
suspicion that she actually liked everything she said she didn’t. He could account for
her one way or another; it was himself he could not understand.
She turned her head in his direction and said, “It’s no reason you can’t work for a
man. It don’t have to be a woman.”
“Aw shut your mouth for a change,” Parker muttered.
If he had been certain she was jealous of the woman he worked for he would have
been pleased but more likely she was concerned with the sin that would result if he
and the woman took a liking to each other. He had told her that the woman was a
hefty young blonde; in fact she was nearly seventy years old and too dried up to have
an interest in anything except getting as much work out of him as she could. Not that
an old woman didn’t sometimes get an interest in a young man, particularly if he was
as attractive as Parker felt he was, but this old woman looked at him the same way
she looked at her old tractor — as if she had to put up with it because it was all she
had. The tractor had broken down the second day Parker was on it and she had set
him at once to cutting bushes, saying out of the side of her mouth to the nigger,
“Everything he touches, he breaks.” She also asked him to wear his shirt when he
worked; Parker had removed it even though the day was not sultry; he put it back on
reluctantly. 
This ugly woman Parker married was his first wife. He had had other women but
he had planned never to get himself tied up legally. He had first seen her one morning
when his truck broke down on the highway. He had managed to pull it off the road
into a neatly swept yard on which sat a peeling two-room house. He got out and
opened the hood of the truck and began to study the motor. Parker had an extra
sense that told him when there was a woman nearby watching him. After he had
leaned over the motor a few minutes, his neck began to prickle. He cast his eye over
the empty yard and porch of the house. A woman he could not see was either nearby
beyond a clump of honeysuckle or in the house, watching him out the window.
Suddenly Parker began to jump up and down and fling his hand about as if he had
mashed it in the machinery. He doubled over and held his hand close to his chest.
“God dammit!” he hollered, “Jesus Christ in hell! Jesus God Almighty damm! God
dammit to hell!” he went on, flinging out the same few oaths over and over as loud as
he could.
Without warning a terrible bristly claw slammed the side of his face and he fell
backwards on the hood of the truck. “You don’t talk no filth here!” a voice close to him
shrilled.
Parker’s vision was so blurred that for an instant he thought he had been attacked
by some creature from above, a giant hawk-eyed angel wielding a hoary weapon. As
his sight cleared, he saw before him a tall raw-boned girl with a broom.
“I hurt my hand,” he said. “I HURT my hand.” He was so incensed that he forgot
that he hadn’t hurt his hand. “My hand may be broke,” he growled although his voice
was still unsteady.
“Lemme see it,” the girl demanded.
Parker stuck out his hand and she came closer and looked at it. There was no
mark on the palm and she took the hand and turned it over. Her own hand was dry
and hot and rough and Parker felt himself jolted back to life by her touch. He looked
more closely at her. I don’t want nothing to do with this one, he thought.
The girl’s sharp eyes peered at the back of the stubby reddish hand she held.
There emblazoned in red and blue was a tattooed eagle perched on a cannon. Parker’s
sleeve was rolled to the elbow. Above the eagle a serpent was coiled about a shield
and in the spaces between the eagle and the serpent there were hearts, some with
arrows through them. Above the serpent there was a spread hand of cards. Every
space on the skin of Parker’s arm, from wrist to elbow, was covered in some loud
design. The girl gazed at this with an almost stupefied smile of shock, as if she had
accidentally grasped a poisonous snake; she dropped the hand.
“I got most of my other ones in foreign parts,” Parker said. “These here I mostly
got in the United States. I got my first one when I was only fifteen year old.”
“Don’t tell me,” the girl said, “I don’t like it. I ain’t got any use for it.”
“You ought to see the ones you can’t see,” Parker said and winked. 
Two circles of red appeared like apples on the girl’s cheeks and softened her
appearance. Parker was intrigued. He did not for a minute think that she didn’t like
the tattoos. He had never yet met a woman who was not attracted to them.
Parker was fourteen when he saw a man in a fair, tattooed from head to foot.
Except for his loins which were girded with a panther hide, the man’s skin was
patterned in what seemed from Parker’s distance — he was near the back of the tent,
standing on a bench — a single intricate design of brilliant color. The man, who was
small and sturdy, moved about on the platform, flexing his muscles so that the
arabesque of men and beasts and flowers on his skin appeared to have a subtle
motion of its own. Parker was filled with emotion, lifted up as some people are when
the flag passes. He was a boy whose mouth habitually hung open. He was heavy and
earnest, as ordinary as a loaf of bread. When the show was over, he had remained
standing on the bench, staring where the tattooed man had been, until the tent was
almost empty.
Parker had never before felt the least motion of wonder in himself. Until he saw
the man at the fair, it did not enter his head that there was anything out of the
ordinary about the fact that he existed. Even then it did not enter his head, but a
peculiar unease settled in him. It was as if a blind boy had been turned so gently in a
different direction that he did not know his destination had been changed.
He had his first tattoo some time after — the eagle perched on the cannon. It was
done by a local artist. It hurt very little, just enough to make it appear to Parker to be
worth doing. This was peculiar too for before he had thought that only what did not
hurt was worth doing. The next year he quit school because he was sixteen and could.
He went to the trade school for a while, then he quit the trade school and worked for
six months in a garage. The only reason he worked at all was to pay for more tattoos.
His mother worked in a laundry and could support him, but she would not pay for any
tattoo except her name on a heart, which he had put on, grumbling. However, her
name was Betty Jean and nobody had to know it was his mother. He found out that
the tattoos were attractive to the kind of girls he liked but who had never liked him
before. He began to drink beer and get in fights. His mother wept over what was
becoming of him. One night she dragged him off to a revival with her, not telling him
where they were going. When he saw the big lighted church, he jerked out of her
grasp and ran. The next day he lied about his age and joined the navy.
Parker was large for the tight sailor’s pants but the silly white cap, sitting low on
his forehead, made his face by contrast look thoughtful and almost intense. After a
month or two in the navy, his mouth ceased to hang open. His features hardened into
the features of a man. He stayed in the navy five years and seemed a natural part of
the gray mechanical ship, except for his eyes, which were the same pale slate-color as
the ocean and reflected the immense spaces around him as if they were a microcosm
of the mysterious sea. In port Parker wandered about comparing the run-down
places he was in to Birmingham, Alabama. Everywhere he went he picked up more
tattoos. 
He had stopped having lifeless ones like anchors and crossed rifles. He had a tiger
and a panther on each shoulder, a cobra coiled about a torch on his chest, hawks on
his thighs, Elizabeth II and Philip over where his stomach and liver were respectively.
He did not care much what the subject was so long as it was colorful; on his abdomen
he had a few obscenities but only because that seemed the proper place for them.
Parker would be satisfied with each tattoo about a month, then something about it
that had attracted him would wear off. Whenever a decent-sized mirror was available,
he would get in front of it and study his overall look. The effect was not of one
intricate arabesque of colors but of something haphazard and botched. A huge
dissatisfaction would come over him and he would go off and find another tattooist
and have another space filled up. The front of Parker was almost completely covered
but there were no tattoos on his back. He had no desire for one anywhere he could
not readily see it himself. As the space on the front of him for tattoos decreased, his
dissatisfaction grew and became general.
After one of his furloughs, he didn’t go back to the navy but remained away
without official leave, drunk, in a rooming house in a city he did not know. His
dissatisfaction, from being chronic and latent, had suddenly become acute and raged
in him. It was as if the panther and the lion and the serpents and the eagles and the
hawks had penetrated his skin and lived inside him in a raging warfare. The navy
caught up with him, put him in the brig for nine months and then gave him a
dishonorable discharge.
After that Parker decided that country air was the only kind fit to breathe. He
rented the shack on the embankment and bought the old truck and took various jobs
which he kept as long as it suited him. At the time he met his future wife, he was
buying apples by the bushel and selling them for the same price by the pound to
isolated homesteaders on back country roads.
“All that there,” the woman said, pointing to his arm, “is no better than what a fool
Indian would do. It’s a heap of vanity.” She seemed to have found the word she
wanted. “Vanity of vanities,” she said.
Well what the hell do I care what she thinks of it? Parker asked himself, but he
was plainly bewildered. “I reckon you like one of these better than another anyway,”
he said, dallying until he thought of something that would impress her.
He thrust the armback at her. “Which you like best?”
“None of them,” she said, “but the chicken is not as bad as the rest.”
“What chicken?” Parker almost yelled.
She pointed to the eagle.
“That’s an eagle,” Parker said. “What fool would waste their time having a chicken
put on themself?”
“What fool would have any of it?” the girl said and turned away. She went slowly
back to the house and left him there to get going. Parker remained for almost five
minutes, looking agape at the dark door she had entered. 
The next day he returned with a bushel of apples. He was not one to be outdone
by anything that looked like her. He liked women with meat on them, so you didn’t
feel their muscles, much less their old bones. When he arrived, she was sitting on the
top step and the yard was full of children, all as thin and poor as herself; Parker
remembered it was Saturday. He hated to be making up to a woman when there were
children around, but it was fortunate he had brought the bushel of apples off the
truck. As the children approached him to see what he carried, he gave each child an
apple and told it to get lost; in that way he cleared out the whole crowd.
The girl did nothing to acknowledge his presence. He might have been a stray pig
or goat that had wandered into the yard and she too tired to take up the broom and
send it off. He set the bushel of apples down next to her on the step. He sat down on a
lower step.
“Help yourself,” he said, nodding at the basket; then he lapsed into silence.
She took an apple quickly as if the basket might disappear if she didn’t make
haste. Hungry people made Parker nervous. He had always had plenty to eat himself.
He grew very uncomfortable. He reasoned he had nothing to say so why should he
say it? He could not think now why he had come or why he didn’t go before he wasted
another bushel of apples on the crowd of children. He supposed they were her
brothers and sisters.
She chewed the apple slowly but with a kind of relish of concentration, bent
slightly but looking out ahead. The view from the porch stretched off across a long
incline studded with iron weed and across the highway to a vast vista of hills and one
small mountain. Long views depressed Parker. You look out into space like that and
you begin to feel as if someone were after you, the navy or the government or
religion.
“Who them children belong to, you?” he said at length.
“I ain’t married yet,” she said. “They belong to momma.” She said it as if it were
only a matter of time before she would be married.
Who in God’s name would marry her? Parker thought.
A large barefooted woman with a wide gap-toothed face appeared in the door
behind Parker. She had apparently been there for several minutes.
“Good evening,” Parker said.
The woman crossed the porch and picked up what was left of the bushel of
apples. “We thank you,” she said and returned with it into the house.
“That your old woman?” Parker muttered.
The girl nodded. Parker knew a lot of sharp things he could have said like “You got
my sympathy,” but he was gloomily silent. He just sat there, looking at the view. He
thought he must be coming down with something.
“If I pick up some peaches tomorrow I’ll bring you some,” he said.
“I’ll be much obliged to you,” the girl said. 
Parker had no intention of taking any basket of peaches back there but the next
day he found himself doing it. He and the girl had almost nothing to say to each other.
One thing he did say was, “I ain’t got any tattoo on my back.”
“What you got on it?” the girl said.
“My shirt,” Parker said. “Haw.”
“Haw, haw,” the girl said politely.
Parker thought he was losing his mind. He could not believe for a minute that he
was attracted to a woman like this. She showed not the least interest in anything but
what he brought until he appeared the third time with two cantaloups. “What’s your
name?” she asked.
“O. E. Parker,” he said.
“What does the O. E. stand for?”
“You can just call me O. E.,” Parker said. “Or Parker. Don’t nobody call me by my
name.”
“What’s it stand for?” she persisted.
“Never mind,” Parker said. “What’s yours?”
“I’ll tell you when you tell me what them letters are the short of,” she said. There
was just a hint of flirtatiousness in her tone and it went rapidly to Parker’s head. He
had never revealed the name to any man or woman, only to the files of the navy and
the government, and it was on his baptismal record which he got at the age of a
month; his mother was a Methodist. When the name leaked out of the navy files,
Parker narrowly missed killing the man who used it.
“You’ll go blab it around,” he said.
“I’ll swear I’ll never tell nobody,” she said. “On God’s holy word I swear it.”
Parker sat for a few minutes in silence. Then he reached for the girl’s neck, drew
her ear close to his mouth and revealed the name in low voice.
“Obadiah,” she whispered. Her face slowly brightened as if the name came as a
sign to her. “Obadiah,” she said.
The name still stank in Parker’s estimation.
“Obadiah Elihue,” she said in a reverent voice.
“If you call me that aloud, I’ll bust your head open,” Parker said. “What’s yours?”
“Sarah Ruth Cates,” she said.
“Glad to meet you, Sarah Ruth,” Parker said.
Sarah Ruth’s father was a Straight Gospel preacher but he was away, spreading it
in Florida. Her mother did not seem to mind his attention to the girl so long as he
brought a basket of something with him when he came. As for Sarah Ruth herself, it
was plain to Parker after he had visited three times that she was crazy about him. She
liked him even though she insisted that pictures on the skin were vanity of vanities
and even after hearing him curse, and even after she had asked him if he was saved
and he had replied that he didn’t see it was anything in particular to save him from.
After that, inspired, Parker had said, “I’d be saved enough if you was to kiss me.”
She scowled. “That ain’t being saved,” she said. 
Not long after that she agreed to take a ride in his truck. Parker parked it on a
deserted road and suggested to her that they lie down together in the back of it.
“Not until after we’re married,” she said — just like that.
“Oh that ain’t necessary,” Parker said and as he reached for her, she thrust him
away with such force that the door of the truck came off and he found himself flat on
his back on the ground. He made up his mind then and there to have nothing further
to do with her.
They were married in the County Ordinary’s office because Sarah Ruth thought
churches were idolatrous. Parker had no opinion about that one way or the other.
The Ordinary’s office was lined with cardboard file boxes and record books with dusty
yellow slips of paper hanging on out of them. The Ordinary was an old woman with
red hair who had held office for forty years and looked as dusty as her books. She
married them from behind the iron-grill of a stand-up desk and when she finished,
she said with a flourish, “Three dollars and fifty cents and till death do you part!” and
yanked some forms out of a machine.
Marriage did not change Sarah Ruth a jot and it made Parker gloomier than ever.
Every morning he decided he had had enough and would not return that night; every
night he returned. Whenever Parker couldn’t stand the way he felt, he would have
another tattoo, but the only surface left on him now was his back. To see a tattoo on
his own back he would have to get two mirrors and stand between them in just the
correct position and this seemed to Parker a good way to make an idiot of himself.
Sarah Ruth who, if she had had better sense, could have enjoyed a tattoo on his back,
would not even look at the ones he had elsewhere. When he attempted to point out
especial details of them, she would shut her eyes tight and turn her back as well.
Except in total darkness, she preferred Parker dressed and with his sleeves rolled
down.
“At the judgement seat of God, Jesus is going to say to you, ‘What you been doing
all your life besides have pictures drawn all over you?’” she said.
“You don’t fool me none,” Parker said, “you’re just afraid that hefty girl I work for’ll
like me so much she’ll say, ‘Come on, Mr. Parker, let’s you and me…’”
“You’re tempting sin,” she said, “and at the judgement seat of God you’ll have to
answer for that too. You ought to go back to selling the fruits of the earth.”
Parker did nothing much when he was at home but listen to what the judgement
seat of God would be like for him if he didn’t change his ways. When he could, he
broke in with tales of the hefty girl he worked for. “‘Mr. Parker,’ he said she said, ‘I
hired you for your brains.’” (She had added, “So why don’t you use them?”)
“And you should have seen her face the first time she saw me without my shirt,”
he said. “‘Mr. Parker,’ she said, ‘you’re a walking panner-rammer!’” This had, in fact,
been her remark but it had been delivered out of one side of her mouth.
Dissatisfaction began to grow so great in Parker that there was no containing it
outside of a tattoo. It had to be his back. There was no help for it. A dim half formed
inspiration began to work in his mind. He visualized having a tattoo put there that 
Sarah Ruth would not be able to resist — a religious subject. He thought of an open
book with HOLY BIBLE tattooed under it and an actual verse printed on the page.
This seemed just the thing for a while; then he began to hear her say, “Ain’t I already
got a real Bible? What you think I want to read the same verse over and over for when
I can read it all?” He needed something better even than the Bible! He thought about
it so much that he began to lose sleep. He was already losing flesh — Sarah Ruth just
threw food in the pot and let it boil. Not knowing for certain why he continued to stay
with a woman who was both ugly and pregnant and no cook made him generally
nervous and irritable, and he developed a little tic in the side of his face.
Once or twice he found himself turning around abruptly as if someone were
trailing him. He had had a granddaddy who had ended in the state mental hospital,
although not until he was seventy-five, but as urgent as it might be for him to get a
tattoo, it was just as urgent that he get exactly the right one to bring Sarah Ruth to
heel. As he continued to worry over it, his eyes took on a hollow preoccupied
expression. The old woman he worked for told him that if he couldn’t keep his mind
on what he was doing, she knew where she could find a fourteen-year-old colored
boy who could. Parker was too preoccupied even to be offended. At any time
previous, he would have left her then and there, saying drily, “Well, you go ahead on
and get him then.”
Two or three mornings later he was baling hay with the old woman’s sorry baler
and her broken down tractor in a large field, cleared save for one enormous old tree
standing in the middle of it. The old woman was the kind who would not cut down a
large old tree because it was a large old tree. She had pointed it out to Parker as if he
didn’t have eyes and told him to be careful not to hit it as the machine picked up hay
near it. Parker began at the outside of the field and made circles inward toward it. He
had to get off the tractor every now and then and untangle the baling cord or kick a
rock out of the way. The old woman had told him to carry the rocks to the edge of the
field, which he did when she was there watching. When he thought he could make it,
he ran over them. As he circled the field his mind was on a suitable design for his
back. The sun, the size of a golf ball, began to switch regularly from in front to behind
him, but he appeared to see it both places as if he had eyes in the back of his head. All
at once he saw the tree reaching out to grasp him. A ferocious thud propelled him
into the air, and he heard himself yelling in an unbelievably loud voice, “GOD ABOVE!”
He landed on his back while the tractor crashed upside down into the tree and
burst into flame. The first thing Parker saw were his shoes, quickly being eaten by the
fire; one was caught under the tractor, the other was some distance away, burning by
itself. He was not in them. He could feel the hot breath of the burning tree on his face.
He scrambled backwards, still sitting, his eyes cavernous, and if he had known how to
cross himself he would have done it.
His truck was on a dirt road at the edge of the field. He moved toward it, still
sitting, still backwards, but faster and faster; halfway to it he got up and began a kind
of forward-bent run from which he collapsed on his knees twice. His legs felt like two 
old rusted rain gutters. He reached the truck finally and took off in it, zigzagging up
the road. He drove past his house on the embankment and straight for the city, fifty
miles distant.
Parker did not allow himself to think on the way to the city. He only knew that
there had been a great change in his life, a leap forward into a worse unknown, and
that there was nothing he could do about it. It was for all intents accomplished.
The artist had two large cluttered rooms over a chiropodist’s office on a back
street. Parker, still barefooted, burst silently in on him at a little after three in the
afternoon. The artist, who was about Parker’s own age — twenty-eight — but thin and
bald, was behind a small drawing table, tracing a design in green ink. He looked up
with an annoyed glance and did not seem to recognize Parker in the hollow-eyed
creature before him.
“Let me see the book you got with all the pictures of God in it,” Parker said
breathlessly. “The religious one.”
The artist continued to look at him with his intellectual, superior stare. “I don’t
put tattoos on drunks,” he said. “You know me!” Parker cried indignantly. “I’m O. E.
Parker! You done work for me before and I always paid!” The artist looked at him
another moment as if he were not altogether sure. “You’ve fallen off some,” he said.
“You must have been in jail.”
“Married,” Parker said.
“Oh,” said the artist. With the aid of mirrors the artist had tattooed on the top of
his head a miniature owl, perfect in every detail. It was about the size of a half dollar
and served him as a show piece. There were cheaper artists in town but Parker had
never wanted anything but the best. The artist went over to a cabinet at the back of
the room and began to look over some art books. “Who are you interested in?” he
said, “saints, angels, Christs or what?”
“God,” Parker said.
“Father, Son or Spirit?”
“Just God,” Parker said impatiently. “Christ. I don’t care. Just so it’s God.”
The artist returned with a book. He moved some papers off another table and put
the book down on it and told Parker to sit down and see what he liked. “The up-todate ones are in the back,” he said.
Parker sat down with the book and wet his thumb. He began to go through it,
beginning at the back where the up-to-date pictures were. Some of them he
recognized — The Good Shepherd, Forbid Them Not, The Smiling Jesus, Jesus the
Physician’s Friend, but he kept turning rapidly backwards and the pictures became
less and less reassuring. One showed a gaunt green dead face streaked with blood.
One was yellow with sagging purple eyes. Parker’s heart began to beat faster and
faster until it appeared to be roaring inside him like a great generator. He flipped the
pages quickly, feeling that when he reached the one ordained, a sign would come. He
continued to flip through until he had almost reached the front of the book. On one of
the pages a pair of eyes glanced at him swiftly. Parker sped on, then stopped. His 
heart too appeared to cut off; there was absolute silence. It said as plainly as if silence
were a language itself, GO BACK.
Parker returned to the picture — the haloed head of a flat stern Byzantine Christ
with all-demanding eyes. He sat there trembling; his heart began slowly to beat again
as if it were being brought to life by a subtle power.
“You found what you want?” the artist asked.
Parker’s throat was too dry to speak. He got up and thrust the book at the artist,
opened at the picture.
“That’ll cost you plenty,” the artist said. “You don’t want all those little blocks
though, just the outline and some better features.”
“Just like it is,” Parker said, “just like it is or nothing.”
“It’s your funeral,” the artist said, “but I don’t do that kind of work for nothing.”
“How much?” Parker asked.
“It’ll take maybe two days work.”
“How much?” Parker said.
“On time or cash?” the artist asked. Parker’s other jobs had been on time, but he
had paid.
“Ten down and ten for every day it takes,” the artist said.
Parker drew ten dollar bills out of his wallet; he had three left in.
“You come back in the morning,” the artist said, putting the money in his own
pocket. “First I’ll have to trace that out of the book.”
“No no!” Parker said. “Trace it now or gimme my money back,” and his eyes blared
as if he were ready for a fight.
The artist agreed. Any one stupid enough to want a Christ on his back, he
reasoned, would be just as likely as not to change his mind the next minute, but once
the work was begun he could hardly do so.
While he worked on the tracing, he told Parker to go wash his back at the sink
with the special soap he used there. Parker did it and returned to pace back and forth
across the room, nervously flexing his shoulders. He wanted to go look at the picture
again but at the same time he did not want to. The artist got up finally and had Parker
lie down on the table. He swabbed his back with ethyl chloride and then began to
outline the head on it with his iodine pencil. Another hour passed before he took up
his electric instrument. Parker felt no particular pain. In Japan he had had a tattoo of
the Buddha done on his upper arm with ivory needles; in Burma, a little brown root of
a man had made a peacock on each of his knees using thin pointed sticks, two feet
long; amateurs had worked on him with pins and soot. Parker was usually so relaxed
and easy under the hand of the artist that he often went to sleep, but this time he
remained awake, every muscle taut.
At midnight the artist said he was ready to quit. He propped one mirror, four feet
square, on a table by the wall and took a smaller mirror off the lavatory wall and put it
in Parker’s hands. Parker stood with his back to the one on the table and moved the
other until he saw a flashing burst of color reflected from his back. It was almost 
completely covered with little red and blue and ivory and saffron squares; from them
he made out the lineaments of the face — a mouth, the beginning of heavy brows, a
straight nose, but the face was empty; the eyes had not yet been put in. The
impression for the moment was almost as if the artist had tricked him and done the
Physician’s Friend.
“It don’t have eyes,” Parker cried out.
“That’ll come,” the artist said, “in due time. We have another day to go on it yet.”
Parker spent the night on a cot at the Haven of Light Christian Mission. He found
these the best places to stay in the city because they were free and included a meal of
sorts. He got the last available cot and because he was still barefooted, he accepted a
pair of secondhand shoes which, in his confusion, he put on to go to bed; he was still
shocked from all that had happened to him. All night he lay awake in the long
dormitory of cots with lumpy figures on them. The only light was from a
phosphorescent cross glowing at the end of the room. The tree reached out to grasp
him again, then burst into flame; the shoe burned quietly by itself; the eyes in the
book said to him distinctly GO BACK and at the same time did not utter a sound. He
wished that he were not in this city, not in this Haven of Light Mission, not in a bed by
himself. He longed miserably for Sarah Ruth. Her sharp tongue and icepick eyes were
the only comfort he could bring to mind. He decided he was losing it. Her eyes
appeared soft and dilatory compared with the eyes in the book, for even though he
could not summon up the exact look of those eyes, he could still feel their
penetration. He felt as though, under their gaze, he was as transparent as the wing of
a fly.
The tattooist had told him not to come until ten in the morning, but when he
arrived at that hour, Parker was sitting in the dark hallway on the floor, waiting for
him. He had decided upon getting up that, once the tattoo was on him, he would not
look at it, that all his sensations of the day and night before were those of a crazy man
and that he would return to doing things according to his own sound judgement.
The artist began where he left off. “One thing I want to know,” he said presently as
he worked over Parker’s back, “why do you want this on you? Have you gone and got
religion? Are you saved?” he asked in a mocking voice.
Parker’s throat felt salty and dry. “Naw,” he said, “I ain’t got no use for none of
that. A man can’t save his self from whatever it is he don’t deserve none of my
sympathy.” These words seemed to leave his mouth like wraiths and to evaporate at
once as if he had never uttered them.
“Then why…”
“I married this woman that’s saved,” Parker said. “I never should have done it. I
ought to leave her. She’s done gone and got pregnant.”
“That’s too bad,” the artist said. “Then it’s her making you have this tattoo.”
“Naw,” Parker said, “she don’t know nothing about it. It’s a surprise for her.”
“You think she’ll like it and lay off you a while?” 
“She can’t hep herself,” Parker said. “She can’t say she don’t like the looks of God.”
He decided he had told the artist enough of his business. Artists were all right in their
place but he didn’t like them poking their noses into the affairs of regular people. “I
didn’t get no sleep last night,” he said. “I think I’ll get some now.”
That closed the mouth of the artist but it did not bring him any sleep. He lay
there, imagining how Sarah Ruth would be struck speechless by the face on his back
and every now and then this would be interrupted by a vision of the tree of fire and
his empty shoe burning beneath it.
The artist worked steadily until nearly four o’clock, not stopping to have lunch,
hardly pausing with the electric instrument except to wipe the dripping dye off
Parker’s back as he went along. Finally he finished. “You can get up and look at it
now,” he said.
Parker sat up but he remained on the edge of the table.
The artist was pleased with his work and wanted Parker to look at it at once.
Instead Parker continued to sit on the edge of the table, bent forward slightly but
with a vacant look. “What ails you?” the artist said. “Go look at it.”
“Ain’t nothing ail me,” Parker said in a sudden belligerent voice. “That tattoo ain’t
going nowhere. It’ll be there when I get there.” He reached for his shirt and began
gingerly to put it on.
The artist took him roughly by the arm and propelled him between the two
mirrors. “Now look,” he said, angry at having his work ignored.
Parker looked, turned white and moved away. The eyes in the reflected face
continued to look at him — still, straight, all-demanding, enclosed in silence.
“It was your idea, remember,” the artist said. “I would have advised something
else.”
Parker said nothing. He put on his shirt and went out the door while the artist
shouted, “I’ll expect all of my money!”
Parker headed toward a package shop on the corner. He bought a pint of whiskey
and took it into a nearby alley and drank it all in five minutes. Then he moved on to a
pool hall nearby which he frequented when he came to the city. It was a well-lighted
barnlike place with a bar up one side and gambling machines on the other and pool
tables in the back. As soon as Parker entered, a large man in a red and black
checkered shirt hailed him by slapping him on the back and yelling, “Yeyyyyyy boy! O.
E. Parker!”
Parker was not yet ready to be struck on the back. “Lay off,” he said, “I got a fresh
tattoo there.”
“What you got this time?” the man asked and then yelled to a few at the machines.
“O.E.’s got him another tattoo.”
“Nothing special this time,” Parker said and slunk over to a machine that was not
being used.
“Come on,” the big man said, “let’s have a look at O.E.’s tattoo,” and while Parker
squirmed in their hands, they pulled up his shirt. Parker felt all the hands drop away 
instantly and his shirt fell again like a veil over the face. There was a silence in the
pool room which seemed to Parker to grow from the circle around him until it
extended to the foundations under the building and upward through the beams in the
roof.
Finally someone said, “Christ!” Then they all broke into noise at once. Parker
turned around, an uncertain grin on his face.
“Leave it to O.E.!” the man in the checkered shirt said. “That boy’s a real card!”
“Maybe he’s gone and got religion,” someone yelled.
“Not on your life,” Parker said.
“O.E.’s got religion and is witnessing for Jesus, ain’t you, O.E.?” a little man with a
piece of cigar in his mouth said wryly. “An o-riginal way to do it if I ever saw one.”
“Leave it to Parker to think of a new one!” the fat man said.
“Yyeeeeeeyyyyyyy boy!” someone yelled and they all began to whistle and curse in
compliment until Parker said, “Aaa shut up.”
“What’d you do it for?” somebody asked.
“For laughs,” Parker said. “What’s it to you?”
“Why ain’t you laughing then?” somebody yelled. Parker lunged into the midst of
them and like a whirlwind on a summer’s day there began a fight that raged amid
overturned tables and swinging fists until two of them grabbed him and ran to the
door with him and threw him out. Then a calm descended on the pool hall as nerve
shattering as if the long barnlike room were the ship from which Jonah had been cast
into the sea.
Parker sat for a long time on the ground in the alley behind the pool hall,
examining his soul. He saw it as a spider web of facts and lies that was not at all
important to him but which appeared to be necessary in spite of his opinion. The eyes
that were now forever on his back were eyes to be obeyed. He was as certain of it as
he had ever been of anything. Throughout his life, grumbling and sometimes cursing,
often afraid, once in rapture, Parker had obeyed whatever instinct of this kind had
come to him — in rapture when his spirit had lifted at the sight of the tattooed man at
the fair, afraid when he had joined the navy, grumbling when he had married Sarah
Ruth.
The thought of her brought him slowly to his feet. She would know what he had to
do. She would clear up the rest of it, and she would at least be pleased. It seemed to
him that, all along, that was what he wanted, to please her. His truck was still parked
in front of the building where the artist had his place, but it was not far away. He got
in it and drove out of the city and into the country night. His head was almost clear of
liquor and he observed that his dissatisfaction was gone, but he felt not quite like
himself. It was as if he were himself but a stranger to himself, driving into a new
country though everything he saw was familiar to him, even at night.
He arrived finally at the house on the embankment, pulled the truck under the
pecan tree and got out. He made as much noise as possible to assert that he was still
in charge here, that his leaving her for a night without word meant nothing except it 
was the way he did things. He slammed the car door, stamped up the two steps and
across the porch and rattled the door knob. It did not respond to his touch. “Sarah
Ruth!” he yelled, “let me in.”
There was no lock on the door and she had evidently placed the back of a chair
against the knob. He began to beat on the door and rattle the knob at the same time.
He heard the bed springs screak and bent down and put his head to the keyhole,
but it was stopped up with paper. “Let me in!” he hollered, bamming on the door
again. “What you got me locked out for?”
A sharp voice close to the door said, “Who’s there?”
“Me,” Parker said, “O.E.”
He waited a moment.
“Me,” he said impatiently, “O.E.”
Still no sound from inside.
He tried once more. “O.E.,” he said, bamming the door two or three more times.
“O. E. Parker. You know me.”
There was a silence. Then the voice said slowly, “I don’t know no O.E.”
“Quit fooling,” Parker pleaded. “You ain’t got any business doing me this way. It’s
me, old O.E., I’m back. You ain’t afraid of me.”
“Who’s there?” the same unfeeling voice said.
Parker turned his head as if he expected someone behind him to give him the
answer. The sky had lightened slightly and there were two or three streaks of yellow
floating above the horizon. Then as he stood there, a tree of light burst over the
skyline.
Parker fell back against the door as if he had been pinned there by a lance.
“Who’s there?” the voice from inside said and there was a quality about it now that
seemed final. The knob rattled and the voice said peremptorily, “Who’s there, I ast
you?”
Parker bent down and put his mouth near the stuffed keyhole. “Obadiah,” he
whispered and all at once he felt the light pouring through him, turning his spider
web soul into a perfect arabesque of colors, a garden of trees and birds and beasts.
“Obadiah Elihue!” he whispered.
The door opened and he stumbled in. Sarah Ruth loomed there, hands on her
hips. She began at once, “That was no hefty blonde woman you was working for and
you’il have to pay her every penny on her tractor you busted up. She don’t keep
insurance on it. She came here and her and me had us a long talk and I…”
Trembling, Parker set about lighting the kerosene lamp.
“What’s the matter with you, wasting that kerosene this near daylight?” she
demanded. “I ain’t got to look at you.”
A yellow glow enveloped them. Parker put the match down and began to
unbutton his shirt.
“And you ain’t going to have none of me this near morning,” she said. 
“Shut your mouth,” he said quietly. “Look at this and then I don’t want to hear no
more out of you.” He removed the shirt and turned his back to her.
“Another picture,” Sarah Ruth growled. “I might have known you was off after
putting some more trash on yourself.”
Parker’s knees went hollow under him. He wheeled around and cried, “Look at it!
Don’t just say that! Look at it!”
“I done looked,” she said.
“Don’t you know who it is?” he cried in anguish.
“No, who is it?” Sarah Ruth said. “It ain’t anybody I know.”
“It’s him,” Parker said.
“Him who?”
“God!” Parker cried.
“God? God don’t look like that!”
“What do you know how he looks?” Parker moaned. “You ain’t seen him.”
“He don’t look,” Sarah Ruth said. “He’s a spirit. No man shall see his face.”
“Aw listen,” Parker groaned, “this is just a picture of him.”
“Idolatry!” Sarah Ruth screamed. “Idolatry! Enflaming yourself with idols under
every green tree! I can put up with lies and vanity but I don’t want no idolator in this
house!” and she grabbed up the broom and began to thrash him across the shoulders
with it.
Parker was too stunned to resist. He sat there and let her beat him until she had
nearly knocked him senseless and large welts had formed on the face of the tattooed
Christ. Then he staggered up and made for the door.
She stamped the broom two or three times on the floor and went to the window
and shook it out to get the taint of him off it. Still gripping it, she looked toward the
pecan tree and her eyes hardened still more. There he was — who called himself
Obadiah Elihue — leaning against the tree, crying like a baby. 