“Seat belt, please," said the stewardess cheerfully as she passed him. Almost as
she spoke, the sign above the archway which led to the forward compartment lit up–
fasten seat belt–with, below, its attendant caution –
 NO SMOKING
Drawing in a deep lungful, Wilson exhaled it in bursts, then pressed the cigarette into
the armrest tray with irritable stabbing motions. Outside, one of the engines coughed
monstrously, spewing out a cloud of fume which fragmented into the night air. The
fuselage began to shudder and Wilson, glancing through the window, saw the exhaust
of flame jetting whitely from the engine's nacelle. The second engine coughed, then
roared, its propeller instantly a blur of revolution. With a tense submissiveness,
Wilson fastened the belt across his lap. Now all the engines were running and
Wilson's head throbbed in unison with the fuselage.
He sat rigidly, staring at the seat ahead as the DC- taxied across the apron,
heating the night with the thundering blast of its exhausts. At the edge of the runway,
it halted. Wilson looked out through the window at the leviathan glitter of the terminal.
By late morning, he thought, showered and cleanly dressed, he would be sitting in the
office of one more contact discussing one more specious deal the net result of which
would not add one jot of meaning to the history of mankind. It was all so damned –
– Wilson gasped as the engines began their warm–up race preparatory to takeoff. The
sound, already loud, became deafening-waves of sound that crashed against Wilson's
ears like club blows. He opened his mouth as if to let it drain. His eyes took on the
glaze of a suffering man, his hands drew in like tensing claws. He started, legs
retracting, as he felt a touch on his arm. Jerking aside his head, he saw the stewardess
who had met him at the door. She was smiling down at him.
"Are you all right?" He barely made out her words.
Wilson pressed his lips together and agitated his hand at her as if pushing her
away. Her smile flared into excess brightness, then fell as she turned and moved away.
The plane began to move – at first lethargically, like some behemoth struggling to
overthrow the pull of its own weight. Then with more speed, forcing off the drag of 

friction. Wilson, turning to the window, saw the dark runway rushing by faster and
faster. On the wing edge, there was a mechanical whining as the flaps descended.
Then, imperceptibly, the giant wheels lost contact with the ground, the earth began to
fall away. Trees flashed underneath, buildings, the darting quicksilver of car lights.
The DC- banked slowly to the right, pulling itself upward toward the frosty glitter of
the stars. Finally, it leveled off and the engines seemed to stop until Wilson's adjusting
ear caught the murmur of their cruising speed. A moment of relief slackened his
muscles, imparting a sense of well-being. Then it was gone.
Wilson sat immobile, staring at the NO SMOKING sign until it winked out,
then, quickly, lit a cigarette. Reaching into the seat-back pocket in front of him, he
slid free his newspaper. As usual, the world was in a state similar to his – friction in
diplomatic circles, earthquakes and gunfire, murder, rape, tornadoes and collisions,
business conflicts, gangsterism. God's in his heaven, all's right with the world, thought
Arthur Jeffrey Wilson. Fifteen minutes later, he tossed the paper aside. His stomach
felt awful. He glanced up at the signs beside the two lavatories. Both, illuminated,
read
OCCUPIED
He pressed out his third cigarette since takeoff and, turning off the overhead
light, stared out through the window. Along the cabin's length, people were already
flicking out their lights and reclining their chairs for sleep. Wilson glanced at his
watch. :. He blew out tired breath. As he'd anticipated, the pills he'd taken before
boarding hadn't done a bit of good.
He stood abruptly as the woman came out of the lavatory and, snatching up his
bag, he started down the aisle. His system, as expected, gave no cooperation. Wilson
stood with a tired moan and adjusted his clothing. Having washed his hands and face,
he removed the toilet kit from the bag and squeezed a filament of paste across his
toothbrush. As he brushed – one hand braced for support against the cold bulkhead –
he looked out through the port. Feet away was the pale blue of the inboard propeller.
Wilson visualized what would happen if it were to tear loose and, like a tri–bladed
cleaver, come slicing in at him. There was a sudden depression in his stomach. Wilson
swallowed instinctively and got some paste–stained saliva down his throat. Gagging,
he turned and spat into the sink, then, hastily, washed out his mouth and took a drink.
Dear God, if only he could have gone by train; had his own compartment, taken a
casual stroll to the club car, settled down in an easy chair with a drink and a magazine.
But there was no such time or fortune in this world. 

He was about to put the toilet kit away when his gaze caught on the oilskin
envelope in the bag. He hesitated, then, setting the small briefcase on the sink, drew
out the envelope and undid it on his lap. He sat staring at the oil–glossed symmetry of
the pistol. He'd carried it around with him for almost a year now. Originally, when
he'd thought about it, it was in terms of money carried, protection from holdup, safety
from teenage gangs in the cities he had to attend. Yet, far beneath, he'd always known
there was no valid reason except one. A reason he thought more of every day.
How simple it would be-here, now...
Wilson shut his eyes and swallowed quickly. He could still taste the toothpaste
in his mouth, a faint nettling of peppermint on the buds. He sat heavily in the
throbbing chill of the lavatory, the oily gun resting in his hands. Until, quite suddenly,
he began to shiver without control. “God, let me go! his mind cried out abruptly. Let
me go, let me go.” He barely recognized the whimpering in his ears.
Abruptly, Wilson sat erect. Lips pressed together, he rewrapped the pistol and
thrust it into his bag, putting the briefcase on top of it, zipping the bag shut. Standing,
he opened the door and stepped outside, hurrying to his seat and sitting down, sliding
the overnight bag precisely into place. He indented the armrest button and pushed
himself back. He was a business man and there was business to be conducted on the
morrow. It was as simple as that. The body needed sleep, he would give it sleep.
Twenty minutes later, Wilson reached down slowly and depressed the button, sitting
up with the chair, his face a mask of vanquished acceptance. Why fight it? he thought.
It was obvious he was going to stay awake. So that was that. He had finished half of
the crossword puzzle before he let the paper drop to his lap. His eyes were too tired.
Sitting up, he rotated his shoulders, stretching the muscles of his back. Now what? he
thought. He didn't want to read, he couldn't sleep. And there were still – he checked
his watch – seven to eight hours left before Los Angeles was reached. How was he to
spend them? He looked along the cabin and saw that, except for a single passenger in
the forward compartment, everyone was asleep. A sudden, overwhelming fury filled
him and he wanted to scream, to throw something, to hit somebody.
Teeth jammed together so rabidly it hurt his jaws, Wilson shoved aside the
curtains with a spastic hand and stared out murderously through the window. Outside,
he saw the wing lights blinking off and on, the lurid flashes of exhaust from the
engine cowlings. Here he was, he thought; twenty-thousand feet above the earth,
trapped in a howling shell of death, moving through polar night toward ... Wilson
twitched as lightning bleached the sky, washing its false daylight across the wing. He
swallowed. Was there going to be a storm? The thought of rain and heavy winds, of
the plane a chip in the sea of sky was not a pleasant one. 

Wilson was a bad flyer. Excess motion always made him ill. Maybe he should
have taken another few Dramamines to be on the safe side. And, naturally, his seat
was next to the emergency door. He thought about it opening accidentally; about
himself sucked from the plane, falling, screaming. Wilson blinked and shook his head.
There was a faint tingling at the back of his neck as he pressed close to the window
and stared out. He sat there motionless, squinting. He could have sworn – Suddenly,
his stomach muscles jerked in violently and he felt his eyes strain forward. There was
something crawling on the wing! Wilson felt a sudden, nauseous tremor in his
stomach. Dear God, had some dog or cat crawled onto the plane before takeoff and, in
some way managed to hold on? It was a sickening thought. The poor animal would be
deranged with terror. Yet, how, on the smooth, wind-blasted surface, could it possibly
discover gripping places? Surely that was impossible. Perhaps, after all, it was only a
bird or –
– The lightning flared and Wilson saw that it was a man!
He couldn't move. Stupefied, he watched the black form crawling down the
wing. Impossible. Somewhere, cased in layers of shock, a voice declared itself but
Wilson did not hear. He was conscious of nothing but the titanic, almost muscle
tearing leap of his heart–and of the man outside. Suddenly, like ice-filled water
thrown across him, there was a reaction; his mind sprang for the shelter of explanation.
A mechanic had, through some incredible oversight, been taken up with the ship and
had managed to cling to it even though the wind had torn his clothes away, even
though the air was thin and close to freezing.
Wilson gave himself no time for refutation. Jarring to his feet, he shouted:
"Stewardess! Stewardess!" his voice a hollow, ringing sound in the cabin. He pushed
the button for her with a jabbing finger. "Stewardess!"
She came running down the aisle, her face tightened with alarm. When she saw
the look on his face, she stiffened in her tracks.
"There's a man out there! A man!" cried Wilson.
"What?" Skin constricted on her cheeks, around her eyes.
"Look, look!" Hand shaking, Wilson dropped back into his seat and pointed out
the window. "He's crawling on the " – The words ended with a choking rattle in his
throat. There was nothing on the wing.
Wilson sat there trembling. For a while, before he turned back, he looked at the
reflection of the stewardess on the window. There was a blank expression on her face. 

At last, he turned and looked up at her. He saw her red lips part as though she meant
to speak but she said nothing, only placing the lips together again and swallowing. An
attempted smile distended briefly at her features.
"I'm sorry, " Wilson said. "It must have been a" – He stopped as though the
sentence were completed. Across the aisle a teenage girl was gaping at him with
sleepy curiosity.
The stewardess cleared her throat. "Can I get you anything?" she asked.
"A glass of water, " Wilson said.
The stewardess turned and moved back up the aisle. Wilson sucked in a long
breath of air and turned away from the young girl's scrutiny. He felt the same. That
was the thing that shocked him most. Where were the visions, the cries, the
pummeling of fists on temples, the tearing out of hair? Abruptly he closed his eyes.
There had been a man, he thought. There had, actually, been a man. That's why he felt
the same. And yet, there couldn't have been. He knew that clearly.
Wilson sat with his eyes closed, wondering what Jacqueline would be doing
now if she were in the seat beside him. Would she be silent, shocked beyond speaking?
Or would she, in the more accepted manner, be fluttering around him, smiling,
chattering, pretending that she hadn't seen? What would his sons think? Wilson felt a
dry sob threatening in his chest. Oh, God –
"Here's your water, sir. "
Twitching sharply, Wilson opened his eyes.
"Would you like a blanket?" inquired the stewardess.
"No." He shook his head. "Thank you," he added, wondering why he was being
so polite.
"If you need anything, just ring," she said.
Wilson nodded. Behind him, as he sat with the untouched cup of water in his
hand, he heard the muted voices of the stewardess and one of the passengers. Wilson
tightened with resentment. Abruptly, he reached down and, careful not to spill the
water, pulled out the overnight bag. Unzipping it, he removed the box of sleeping
capsules and washed two of them down. Crumpling the empty cup, he pushed it into
the seat-pocket in front of him, then, not looking, slid the curtains shut. There – it was 

ended. One hallucination didn't make insanity. Wilson turned onto his right side and
tried to set himself against the fitful motion of the ship. He had to forget about this;
that was the most important thing. He mustn't dwell on it. Unexpectedly, he found a
wry smile forming on his lips. Well, by God, no one could accuse him of mundane
hallucinations anyway. When he went at it, he did a royal job. A naked man crawling
down a DC-'s wing at twenty-thousand feet, there was a chimera worthy of the
noblest lunatic.
The humor faded quickly. Wilson felt chilled. It had been so clear, so vivid.
How could the eyes see such a thing when it did not exist? How could what was in his
mind make the physical act of seeing work to its purpose so completely? He hadn't
been groggy, in a daze; nor had it been a shapeless, gauzy vision. It had been sharply
three-dimensional, fully a part of the things he saw which he knew were real. That
was the frightening part of it. It had not been dreamlike in the least. He had looked at
the wing and …
Impulsively, Wilson drew aside the curtain. He did not know, immediately, if
he would survive. It seemed as if all the contents of his chest and stomach were
bloating horribly, the excess pushing up into his throat and head, choking away breath,
pressing out his eyes. Imprisoned in this swollen mass, his heart pulsed strickenly,
threatening to burst its case as Wilson sat, paralyzed. Only inches away, separated
from him by the thickness of a piece of glass, the man was staring at him. It was a
hideously malignant face, a face not human. Its skin was grimy, of a wide pored
coarseness; its nose a squat, discolored lump; its lips misshapen, cracked, forced apart
by teeth of a grotesque size and crookedness; its eyes recessed and small – unblinking.
All framed by shaggy, tangled hair which sprouted, too, in furry tufts from the man's
ears and nose, birdlike, down across his cheeks.
Wilson sat riven to his chair, incapable of response. Time stopped and lost its
meaning. Function and analysis ceased. All were frozen in an ice of shock. Only the
beat of heart went on - alone, a frantic leaping in the darkness. Wilson could not so
much as blink. Dull-eyed, breathless, he returned the creature's vacant stare. Abruptly
then, he closed his eyes and his mind, rid of the sight, broke free. It isn't there, he
thought. He pressed his teeth together, breath quavering in his nostrils. It isn't there, it
simply is not there!
Clutching at the armrests with pale-knuckled fingers, Wilson braced himself.
There is no man out there, he told himself. It was impossible that there should be a
man out there crouching on the wing looking at him. He opened his eyes – to shrink
against the seat back with a gagging inhalation. Not only was the man still there but
he was grinning. 

Wilson turned his fingers in and dug the nails into his palms until pain flared.
He kept it there until there was no doubt in his mind that he was fully conscious. Then,
slowly, arm quivering and numb, Wilson reached up for the button which would
summon the stewardess. He would not make the same mistake again – cry out, leap to
his feet, alarm the creature into flight. He kept reaching upward, a tremor of aghast
excitement in his muscles now because the man was watching him, the small eyes
shifting with the movement of his arm. He pressed the button carefully once, twice.
Now come, he thought. Come with your objective eyes and see what I see – but hurry.
In the rear of the cabin, he heard a curtain being drawn aside and, suddenly, his
body stiffened. The man had turned his caliban head to look in that direction.
Paralyzed, Wilson stared at him. Hurry, he thought. For God's sake, hurry! It was over
in a second. The man's eyes shifted back to Wilson, across his lips a smile of
monstrous cunning. Then with a leap, he was gone.
"Yes, sir?"
For a moment, Wilson suffered the fullest anguish of madness. His gaze kept
jumping from the spot where the man had stood to the stewardess's questioning face,
then back again. Back to the stewardess, to the wing, to the stewardess, his breath
caught, his eyes stark with dismay.
"What is it?" asked the stewardess.
It was the look on her face that did it. Wilson closed a vice on his emotions.
She couldn't possibly believe him. He realized it in an instant.
"I'm – I'm sorry, " he faltered. He swallowed so dryly that it made a clicking
noise in his throat. "It's nothing. I – apologize. "
The stewardess obviously didn't know what to say. She kept leaning against the
erratic yawing of the ship, one hand holding on to the back of the seat beside Wilson's,
the other stirring limply along the seam of her skirt. Her lips were parted slightly as if
she meant to speak but could not find the words. "Well," she said finally and cleared
her throat, "if you – need anything. "
"Yes, yes. Thank you. Are we – going into a storm?"
The stewardess smiled hastily. "Just a small one," she said. "Nothing to worry
about. " 

Wilson nodded with little twitching movements. Then, as the stewardess turned
away, breathed in suddenly, his nostrils flaring. He felt certain that she already
thought him mad but didn't know what to do about it because, in her course of training,
there had been no instruction on the handling of passengers who thought they saw
small men crouching on the wing. Thought? Wilson turned his head abruptly and
looked outside. He stared at the dark rise of the wing, the spouting flare of the
exhausts, the blinking lights. He'd seen the man – to that he'd swear. How could he be
completely aware of everything around him – be, in all ways, sane and still imagine
such a thing? Was it logical that the mind, in giving way, should, instead of distorting
all reality, insert, within the still intact arrangement of details, one extraneous sight?
No, not logical at all.
Suddenly, Wilson thought about war, about the newspaper stories which
recounted the alleged existence of creatures in the sky who plagued the Allied pilots
in their duties. They called them gremlins, he remembered. Were there, actually, such
beings? Did they, truly, exist up here, never falling, riding on the wind, apparently of
bulk and weight, yet impervious to gravity?
He was thinking that when the man appeared again. One second the wing was
empty. The next, with an arcing descent, the man came jumping down to it. There
seemed no impact. He landed almost fragilely, short, hairy arms outstretched as if for
balance. Wilson tensed. Yes, there was knowledge in his look. The man – was he to
think of it as a man? – somehow understood that he had tricked Wilson into calling
the stewardess in vain. Wilson felt himself tremble with alarm. How could he prove
the man's existence to others? He looked around desperately. That girl across the aisle.
If he spoke to her softly, woke her up, would she be able to – No, the man would jump
away before she could see. Probably to the top of the fuselage where no one could see
him, not even the pilots in their cockpit. Wilson felt a sudden burst of self –
condemnation that he hadn't gotten that camera Walter had asked for. Dear Lord, he
thought, to be able to take a picture of the man. He leaned in close to the window.
What was the man doing? Abruptly, darkness seemed to leap away as the wing was
chalked with lightning and Wilson saw. Like an inquisitive child, the man was
squatted on the hitching wing edge, stretching out his right hand toward one of the
whirling propellers. As Wilson watched, fascinatedly appalled, the man's hand drew
closed and closer to the blurring gyre until, suddenly, it jerked away and the man's lips
twitched back in a soundless cry. He's lost a finger! Wilson thought, sickened. But,
immediately, the man reached forward again, gnarled finger extended, the picture of
some monstrous infant trying to capture the spin of a fan blade. If it had not been so
hideously out of place it would have been amusing for, objectively seen, the man, at;
that moment, was a comic sight – a fairy tale troll somehow come to life, wind 

whipping at the hair across his head and body, all of his attention centered on the turn
of the propeller.
How could this be madness? Wilson suddenly thought. What self-revelation
could this farcical little horror possibly bestow on him? Again and again, as Wilson
watched, the man reached forward. Again and again jerked back his fingers,
sometimes, actually, putting them in his mouth as if to cool them. And, always,
apparently checking, he kept glancing back across at his shoulder looking at Wilson.
He knows, thought Wilson. Knows that this is a game between us. If I am able to get
someone else to see him, then he loses. If I am the only witness, then he wins. The
sense of faint amusement was gone now. Wilson clenched his teeth. Why in hell didn't
the pilots see!
Now the man, no longer interested in the propeller, was settling himself across
the engine cowling like a man astride a bucking horse. Wilson stared at him. Abruptly
a shudder plaited down his back. The little man was picking at the plates that sheathed
the engine, trying to get his nails beneath them. Impulsively, Wilson reached up and
pushed the button for the stewardess. In the rear of the cabin, he heard her coming and,
for a second, thought he'd fooled the man, who seemed absorbed with his efforts. At
the last moment, however, just before the stewardess arrived, the man glanced over at
Wilson. Then, like a marionette jerked upward from its stage by wires, he was flying
up into the air.
"Yes?" She looked at him apprehensively.
"Will you – sit down, please?" he asked.
She hesitated. "Well, I –"
"Please."
She sat down gingerly on the seat beside his. "What is it, Mr. Wilson?" she
asked.
He braced himself. "That man is still outside," he said. The stewardess stared at
him. "The..the reason I'm telling you this, " Wilson hurried on, "is that he's starting to
tamper with one of the engines." She turned her eyes instinctively toward the window.
"No, no, don't look," he told her. "He isn't there now. "He cleared his throat viscidly.
"He – jumps away whenever you come here. "A sudden nausea gripped him as he
realized what she must be thinking. As he realized what he, himself, would think if
someone told him such a story, a wave of dizziness seemed to pass across him and he 

thought-I am going mad! "The point is this, "he said, fighting off the thought. "If I'm
not imagining this thing, the ship is in danger."
"Yes, " she said.
"I know, "he said. "You think I've lost my mind."
"Of course not, " she said.
"All I ask is this, "he said, struggling against the rise of anger. "Tell the pilots
what I've said. Ask them to keep an eye on the wings. If they see nothing – all right.
But if they do..."
The stewardess sat there quietly, looking at him.
Wilson's hands curled into fists that trembled in his lap. "Well?" he asked.
She pushed to her feet. "I'll tell them, "she said.
Turning away, she moved along the aisle with a movement that was, to Wilson,
poorly contrived - too fast to be normal yet, clearly, held back as if to reassure him
that she wasn't fleeing.
He felt his stomach churning as he looked out at the wing again. Abruptly, the
man appeared again, landing on the wing like some grotesque ballet dancer. Wilson
watched him as he set to work again, straddling the engine casing with his thick, bare
legs and picking at the plates. Well, what was he so concerned about? thought Wilson.
That miserable creature couldn't pry up rivets with his fingernails. Actually, it didn't
matter if the pilots saw him or not – at least as far as the safety of the plane was
concerned. As for his own personal reasons...
It was at that moment that the man pried up one edge of a plate. Wilson gasped.
"Here, quickly!" he shouted, noticing, up ahead, the stewardess and the pilot coming
through the cockpit doorway. The pilot's eyes jerked up to look at Wilson, then
abruptly, he was pushing past the stewardess and lurching up the aisle.
"Hurry!" Wilson cried.
He glanced out the window in time to see the man go leaping upward. That
didn't matter now. There would be evidence.
"What's going on?" the pilot asked, stopping breathlessly beside his seat. 

"He's torn up one of the engine plates!" said Wilson in a shaking voice.
"He's what?"
"The man outside!" said Wilson. "I tell you he's – !"
"Mister Wilson, keep your voice down!" ordered the pilot. Wilson's jaw went
slack. "I don't know what's going on here, "said the pilot, "but –"
"Will you look?!" shouted Wilson.
"Mister Wilson, I'm warning you."
"For God's sake!" Wilson swallowed quickly, trying to repress the blinding
rage he felt. Abruptly, he pushed back against his seat and pointed at the window with
a palsied hand. "Will you, for God's sake, look?" he asked.
Drawing in an agitated breath, the pilot bent over. In a moment, his gaze shifted
coldly to Wilson's. "Well?" he asked.
Wilson jerked his head around. The plates were in their normal position. "Oh,
now wait," he said before the dread could come. "I saw him pry that plate up."
"Mister Wilson, if you don't -"
"I said I saw him pry it up," said Wilson.
The pilot stood there looking at him in the same withdrawn, almost aghast way
as the stewardess had.
Wilson shuddered violently. "Listen, I saw him!" he cried. The sudden break in
his voice appalled him.
In a second, the pilot was down beside him. "Mister Wilson, please," he said.
"All right, you saw him. But remember there are other people aboard. We mustn't
alarm them."
Wilson was too shaken to understand at first. "You mean you've seen him
then?" he asked.
"Of course," the pilot said, "but we don't want to frighten the passengers. You
can understand that. " 

"Of course, of course, I don't want to – " Wilson felt a spastic coiling in his
groin and lower stomach. Suddenly, he pressed his lips together and looked at the
pilot with malevolent eyes. "I understand," he said.
"The thing we have to remember –" began the pilot.
"We can stop now," Wilson said.
"Sir?"
Wilson shuddered. "Get out of here," he said.
"Mister Wilson, what ?"
"Will you stop?" Face whitening, Wilson turned from the pilot and stared out at
the wing, eyes like stone. He glared back suddenly. "Rest assured I'd not say another
word!" he snapped.
"Mr. Wilson, try to understand our –"
Wilson twisted away and stared out venomously at the engine. From a corner of
his vision, he saw two passengers standing in the aisle looking at him. Idiots! his mind
exploded. He felt his hands begin to tremble and, for a few seconds, was afraid that he
was going to vomit. It's the motion, he told himself. The plane was bucking in the air
now like a storm-tossed boat. He realized that the pilot was still talking to him and,
refocusing his eyes, he looked at the man's reflection in the window. Beside him,
mutely somber, stood the stewardess. Blind idiots, both of them, thought Wilson. He
did not indicate his notice of their departure. Reflected on the window, he saw them
heading toward the rear of the cabin. They'll be discussing me now, he thought.
Setting up plans in case I grow violent. He wished now that the man would reappear,
pull off the cowling plate and ruin the engine. It gave him a sense of vengeful pleasure
to know that only he stood between catastrophe and the more than thirty people
aboard. If he chose, he could allow that catastrophe to take place. Wilson smiled
without humor. There would be a royal suicide, he thought.
The little man dropped down again and Wilson saw that what he'd thought was
correct – the man had pressed the plate back into place before jumping away, for now
he was prying it up again and it was raising easily, peeling back like skin excised by
some grotesque surgeon. The motion of that wing was very broken but the man
seemed to have no difficulty staying balanced. 

Once more Wilson felt panic. What was he to do? No one believed him. If he
tried to convince them any more they'd probably restrain him by force. If he asked the
stewardess to sit by him it would be, at best, only a momentary reprieve. The second
she departed or, remaining, fell asleep, the man would return. Even if she stayed
awake beside him, what was to keep the man from tampering with the engines on the
other wing? Wilson shuddered, a coldness of dread misting along his bones. Dear God,
there was nothing to be done. He twitched as, across the window through which he
watched the little man, the pilot's reflection passed. The insanity of the moment
almost broke him – the man and the pilot within feet of each other, both seen by him
yet not aware of one another. No, that was wrong. The little man had glanced across
his shoulder as the pilot passed, as if he knew there was no need to leap off any more,
that Wilson's capacity for interfering was at an end.
Wilson suddenly trembled with mind-searing rage. I'll kill you! he thought!
You filthy little animal, I'll kill you! Outside, the engine faltered. It lasted only for a
second, but, in that second, it seemed to Wilson as if his heart had, also, stopped. He
pressed against the window, staring. The man had bent the cowling plate far back and
now was on his knees, poking a curious hand into the engine.
"Don't," Wilson heard the whimper of his own voice begging. "Don't." Again,
the engine failed. Wilson looked around in horror. Was everyone deaf? He raised his
hand to press the button for the stewardess, then jerked it back. No, they'd lock him up,
restrain him somehow. And he was the only one who knew what was happening, the
only one who could help. "God" Wilson bit his lower lip until the pain made him
whimper. He twisted around again and jolted.
The stewardess was hurrying down the rocking aisle. She'd heard it! He watched her
fixedly and saw her glance at him as she passed his seat. She stopped three seats down
the aisle. Someone else had heard! Wilson watched the stewardess as she leaned over,
talking to the unseen passenger. Outside, the engine coughed again. Wilson jerked his
head around and looked out with horror pinched eyes. "Damn you!" he whined. He
turned again and saw the stewardess coming back up the aisle. She didn't look
alarmed. Wilson stared at her with unbelieving eyes. It wasn't possible. He twisted
around to follow her swaying movement and saw her turn in at the kitchen.
"No. "
Wilson was shaking so badly now he couldn't stop. No one had heard. No one knew.
Suddenly, Wilson bent over and slid his overnight bag out from under the seat.
Unzipping it, he jerked out his briefcase and threw it on the carpeting. Then, reaching
in again, he grabbed the oilskin envelope and straightened up. From the corners of his
eyes, he saw the stewardess coming back and pushed the bag beneath the seat with his 

shoes, shoving the oilskin envelope beside himself. He sat there rigidly, breath
quavering in his chest, as she went by. Then he pulled the envelope into his lap and
untied it. His movements were so feverish that he almost dropped the pistol. He
caught it by the barrel, then clutched at the stock with white knuckled fingers and
pushed off the safety catch. He glanced outside and felt himself grow cold. The man
was looking at him. Wilson pressed his shaking lips together. It was impossible that
the man knew what he intended. He swallowed and tried to catch his breath. He
shifted his gaze to where the stewardess was handing some pills to the passenger
ahead, then looked back at the wing. The man was turning to the engine once again,
reaching in. Wilson's grip tightened on the pistol. He began to raise it. Suddenly, he
lowered it. The window was too thick. The bullet might be deflected and kill one of
the passengers. He shuddered and stared out at the little man. Again the engine failed
and Wilson saw an eruption of sparks cast light across the man's animal features.
He braced himself. There was only one answer.
He looked down at the handle of the emergency door. There was a transparent cover
over it. Wilson pulled it free and dropped it. He looked outside. The man was still
there, crouched and probing at the engine with his hand. Wilson sucked in trembling
breath. He put his left hand on the door handle and tested. It wouldn't move downward.
Upward there was play. Abruptly, Wilson let go and put the pistol in his lap. No time
for argument, he told himself. With shaking hands, he buckled the belt across his
thighs. When the door was opened, there would be a tremendous rushing out of air.
For the safety of the ship, he must not go with it. Now. Wilson picked the pistol up
again, his heartbeat staggering. He'd have to be sudden, accurate. If he missed, the
man might jump onto the other wing – worse – onto the tail assembly where, inviolate,
he could rupture wires, mangle flaps, destroy the balance of the ship. No, this was the
only way. He'd fire low and try to hit the man in the chest or stomach. Wilson filled
his lungs with air. Now, he thought. Now.
The stewardess came up the aisle as Wilson started pulling at the handle. For a
moment, frozen in her steps, she couldn't speak. A look of stupefied horror distended
her features and she raised one hand as if imploring him. Then, suddenly, her voice
was shrilling above the noise of the engines. "Mr. Wilson, no!"
"Get back!" cried Wilson and he wrenched the handle up. The door seemed to
disappear. One second it was by him, in his grip. The next, with a hissing roar, it was
gone. In the same instant, Wilson felt himself enveloped by a monstrous suction
which tried to tear him from his seat. His head and shoulders left the cabin and,
suddenly, he was breathing tenuous, freezing air. For a moment, eardrums almost
bursting from the thunder of the engines, eyes blinded by the arctic winds, he forgot 

the man. It seemed he heard a prick of screaming in the maelstrom that surrounded
him, a distant shout.
Then Wilson saw the man. He was walking across the wing, gnarled form leaning
forward, talon twisted hands outstretched in eagerness. Wilson flung his arm up, fired.
The explosion was like a popping in the roaring violence of the air. The man
staggered, lashed out and Wilson felt a streak of pain across his head. He fired again
at immediate range and saw the man go flailing backward – then, suddenly, disappear
with no more solidity than a paper doll swept in a gale. Wilson felt a bursting
numbness in his brain. He felt the pistol torn from failing fingers. Then all was lost in
winter darkness.
He stirred and mumbled. There was a warmness trickling in his veins, his limbs felt
wooden. In the darkness, he could hear a shuffling sound, a delicate swirl of voices.
He was lying, face up, on something – moving, joggling. A cold wind sprinkled on his
face, he felt the surface tilt beneath him. He sighed. The plane was landed and he was
being carried off on a stretcher. His head wound, likely, plus an injection to quiet him.
"Nuttiest way of tryin' to commit suicide I ever heard of, " said a voice somewhere.
Wilson felt the pleasure of amusement. Whoever spoke was wrong, of course - as
would be established soon enough when the engine was examined and they checked
his wound more closely. Then they'd realize that he'd saved them all. Wilson slept
without dreams.