MR. BENEDICT came out of his little house. He stood on the porch, painfully shy of the sun
and inferior to people. A little dog trotted by with clever eyes; so clever that Mr. Benedict could
not meet its gaze. A small child peered through the wrought-iron gate around the graveyard, near
the church, and Mr. Benedict winced at the pale penetrant curiosity of the child.
 'You're the funeral man,' said the child.
 Cringing within himself, Mr. Benedict did not speak.
 'You own the church?' asked the child, finally.
 'Yes,' said Mr. Benedict.
 'And the funeral place?'
 'Yes,' said Mr. Benedict bewilderedly.
 'And the yards and the stones and the graves?' wondered the child.
 'Yes,' said Mr. Benedict, with some show of pride. And it was true. An amazing thing it was.
A stroke of business luck really, that had kept him busy and humming nights over long years.
First he had landed the church and the churchyard, with a few green-mossed tombs, when the
Baptist people moved up-town. Then he had built himself a fine little mortuary, in Gothic style,
of course, and covered it with ivy, and then added a small house for himself, way in back. It was
very convenient to die for Mr. Benedict. He handled you in and out of buildings with a minimum
of confusion and a maximum of synthetic benediction. No need of a funeral procession! declared
his large advertisements in the morning paper. Out of the church and into the earth, slick as a
whistle. Nothing but the finest preservatives used!
 The child continued to stare at him and he felt like a candle blown out in the wind. He was so
very inferior. Anything that lived or moved made him feel apologetic and melancholy. He was
continually agreeing with people, never daring to argue or shout or say no. Whoever you might
be, if Mr. Benedict met you on the street he would look up your nostrils or perceive your ears or
examine your hairline with his little shy, wild eyes and never look you straight in your eyes and
he would hold your hand between his cold ones as if your hand was a precious gift as he said to
you:
 'You are definitely, irrevocably, believably correct.'
 But, always, when you talked to him, you felt he never heard a word you said.
 Now, he stood on his porch and said, 'You are a sweet little child,' to the little staring child, in
fear that the child might not like him.
 Mr. Benedict walked down the steps and out the gate, without once looking at his little
mortuary building. He saved that pleasure for later. It was very important that things took the
right precedence. It wouldn't pay to think with joy of the bodies awaiting his talents in the 
mortuary building. No, it was better to follow his usual day-after-day routine. He would let the
conflict begin.
 He knew just where to go to get himself enraged. Half of the day he spent travelling from
place to place in the little town, letting the superiority of the living neighbours overwhelm him,
letting his own inferiority dissolve him, bathe him in perspiration, tie his heart and brain into
trembling knots.
 He spoke with Mr. Rodgers, the druggist, idle, senseless morning talk. And he saved and put
away all the little slurs and intonations and insults that Mr. Rodgers sent his way. Mr. Rodgers
always had some terrible thing to say about a man in the funeral profession. 'Ha, ha,' laughed Mr.
Benedict at the latest joke upon himself, and he wanted to cry with miserable violence. 'There
you are, you cold one,' said Mr. Rodgers on this particular morning. 'Cold one,' said Mr.
Benedict. 'Ha, ha!'
 Outside the drug-store, Mr. Benedict met up with Mr. Stuyvesant, the contractor. Mr.
Stuyvesant looked at his watch to estimate just how much time he dared waste on Benedict
before trumping up some appointment. 'Oh, hello, Benedict,' shouted Stuyvesant. 'How's
business? I bet you're going at it tooth and nail. Did you get it? I said, I bet you're going at it
tooth and — ' 'Yes, yes,' chuckled Mr. Benedict vaguely. 'And how is your business, Mr.
Stuyvesant?' 'Say, how do your hands get so cold, Benny old man? That's a cold shake you got
there. You just get done embalming a frigid woman? Hey, that's not bad. You heard what I said?'
roared Mr. Stuyvesant, pounding him on the back. 'Good, good!' cried Mr. Benedict, with a
fleshless smile. 'Good day.'
 On it went, person after person. Mr. Benedict, pummelled on from one to the next, was the
lake into which all refuse was thrown. People began with little pebbles and then when Mr.
Benedict did not ripple or protest, they heaved a stone, a brick, a boulder. There was no bottom
to Mr. Benedict, no splash and no settling. The lake did not answer.
 As the day passed he became more helpless and enraged with them, and he walked from
building to building and had more little meetings and conversations and hated himself with a
very real, masochistic pleasure. But the thing that kept him going most of all was the thought of
the night pleasures to come. So he inflicted himself again and again with these stupid, pompous
bullies and bowed to them and held his hands like little biscuits before his stomach, and asked no
more than to be sneered at.
 'There you are, meat-chopper,' said Mr. Flinger, the delicatessen man. 'How are all your
corned beeves and pickled brains?'
 Things worked to a crescendo of inferiority. With a final kettle-drumming of insult and
terrible self-effacement, Mr. Benedict, seeking wildly the correct time from his wrist watch,
turned and ran back through the town. He was at his peak, he was all ready now, ready to work,
ready to do what must be done, and enjoy himself. The awful part of the day was over, the good
part was now to begin! He ran eagerly up the steps to his mortuary.
 The room waited like a fall of snow. There were white hummocks and pale delineations of
things recumbent under sheets in the dimness.
 The door burst open.
 Mr. Benedict, framed in a flow of light, stood in the door, head back, one hand upraised in
dramatic salute, the other hand upon the door-knob in unnatural rigidity.
 He was the puppet-master come home. 
 He stood a long minute in the very centre of his theatre. In his head applause, perhaps,
thundered. He did not move, but lowered his head in abject appreciation of this kind, kind
applauding audience.
 He carefully removed his coat, hung it up, got himself into a fresh white smock, buttoned the
cuffs with professional crispness, then washed his hands together as he looked around at his very
good friends.
 It had been a fine week; there were any number of family relics lying under the sheets, and as
Mr. Benedict stood before them he felt himself grow and grow and tower and stretch over them.
 'Like Alice!' he cried to himself in surprise. 'Taller, taller. Curiouser and curiouser!' He flexed
his hands straight out and up.
 He had never gotten over his initial incredulity when in the room with the dead. He was both
delighted and bewildered to discover that here he was master of peoples, here he might do what
he wished with men, and they must, by necessity, be polite and co-operative with him. They
could not run away. And now, as on other days, he felt himself released and resilient, growing,
growing like Alice. 'Oh, so tall, oh, so tall, so very tall. . . until my head. . . bumps. . . the ceiling.'
 He walked about among the sheeted people. He felt the same he did when coming from a
picture show late at night, very strong, very alert, very certain of himself. He felt that everyone
was watching him as he left a picture show, and that he was very handsome and very correct and
brave and all the things that the picture hero was, his voice oh, so resonant, persuasive, and he
had the right lilt to his left eyebrow and the right tap with his cane — and sometimes this movieinduced hypnosis lasted all the way home and persisted into sleep. Those were the only two
times in his living he felt miraculous and fine, at the picture show, or here — in his own little
theatre of the cold.
 He walked along the sleeping rows, noting each name on its white card.
 'Mrs. Walters. Mr. Smith. Miss Brown. Mr. Andrews. Ah, good afternoon, one and all!'
 'How are you today, Mrs. Shellmund?' he wanted to know, lifting a sheet as if looking for a
child under a bed. 'You're looking splendid, dear lady.'
 Mrs. Shellmund had never spoken to him in her life; she'd always gone by like a large white
statue with roller skates hidden under her skirts, which gave her an elegant gliding,
imperturbable rush.
 'My dear Mrs. Shellmund,' he said, pulling up a chair and regarding her through a magnifyingglass. 'Do you realize, my lady, that you have a sebaceous condition of the pores? You were
quite waxen in life. Pore trouble. Oil and grease and pimples. A rich, rich diet, Mrs. Shellmund,
there was your trouble. Too many frosties and spongie cakes and cream candies. You always
prided yourself on your brain, Mrs. Shellmund, and thought I was like a dime under your toe, or
a penny, really. But you kept that wonderful priceless brain of yours afloat in parfaits and fizzes
and limeades and sodas and were so very superior to me that now, Mrs. Shellmund, here is what
shall happen. . .'
 He did a neat operation on her. Cutting the scalp in a circle, he lifted it off, then lifted out the
brain. Then he prepared a cake-confectioner's little sugar-bellows and squirted her empty head
full of little whipped cream and crystal ribbons, stars and frollops, in pink, white and green, and
on top he printed in a fine pink scroll SWEET DREAMS and put the skull back on and sewed it
in place and hid the marks with wax and powder. 'So there,' he said, finished.
 He walked on to the next table.
 'Good afternoon, Mr. Wren. Good afternoon. And how is the master of the racial hatreds
today, Mr. Wren? Pure, white, laundered Mr. Wren. Clean as snow, white as linen, Mr. Wren 
you are. The man who hated Jews and negroes. Minorities, Mr. Wren, minorities.' He pulled
back the sheet. Mr. Wren stared up with glassy cold eyes. 'Mr. Wren, look upon a member of a
minority. Myself. The minority of inferiors, those who speak not above a whisper, those afraid of
talking aloud, those frightened little nonentities, mice. Do you know what I am going to do with
you, Mr. Wren? First, let us draw your blood from you, intolerant friend.' The blood was drawn
off 'Now — the injection of, you might say, embalming fluid.'
 Mr. Wren, snow-white, linen-pure, lay with the fluid going in him.
 Mr. Benedict laughed.
 Mr. Wren turned black; black as dirt, black as night.
 The embalming fluid was — ink.

 'And hello to you, Edmund Worth!'
 What a handsome body Worth had. Powerful, with muscles pinned from huge bone to huge
bone, and a chest like a boulder. Women had grown speechless when he walked by, men had
stared with envy and hoped they might borrow that body some night and ride home in it to the
wife and give her a nice surprise. But Worth's body had always been his own, and he had applied
it to those tasks and pleasures which made him a conversational topic among all people who
enjoyed sin.
 'And now, here you are,' said Mr. Benedict, looking down at the fine body with pleasure. For a
moment he was lost in memory of his own body in his own past.
 He had once tried strangling himself with one of those apparatuses you nail in a doorway and
chuck under your jawbone and pull yourself up on, hoping to add an inch to his ridiculously
short frame. To counteract his deadly pale skin he had lain in the sun, but he boiled and his skin
fell off in pink leaflets, leaving only more pink, moist, sensitive skin. And what could he do
about the eyes from which his mind peered, those close-set, glassy little eyes and the tiny
wounded mouth? You can repaint houses, burn trash, move from the slum, shoot your mother,
buy new clothes, get a car, make money, change all those outer environmentals for something
new. But what's the brain to do when caught like cheese in the throat of a mouse? His own
environment thus betrayed him; his own skin, body, colour, voice gave him no chance to extend
out into that vast bright world where people tickled ladies' chins and kissed their mouths and
shook hands with friends and traded aromatic cigars.
 Thinking in this fashion, Mr. Benedict stood over the magnificent body of Edmund Worth.
 He severed Worth's head, put it in a coffin on a small satin pillow, facing up, then he placed
one hundred and ninety pounds of bricks in the coffin and arranged some pillows inside a black
coat and a white shirt and tie to look like the upper body, and covered the whole with a blanket
of blue velvet, up to the chin. It was a fine illusion.
 The body itself he placed in a refrigerating vault.
 'When I die, I shall leave specific orders, Mr. Worth, that my head be severed and buried,
joined to your body. By that time I shall have acquired an assistant willing to perform such a
rascally act, for money. If one cannot have a body worthy of love in life, one can at least gain
such a body in death. Thank you.'
 He slammed the lid on Edmund Worth.

 Since it was a growing and popular habit in the town for people to be buried with the coffin
lids closed over them during the service, this gave Mr. Benedict great opportunities to vent his
repressions on his hapless guests. Some he locked in their boxes upside down, some face down,
or making obscene gestures. He had the most utterly wondrous fun with a group of old maiden
ladies who were mashed in a car on their way to an afternoon tea. They were famous gossips,
always with heads together over some choice bit. What the onlookers at the triple funeral did not
know (all three casket lids were shut) was that, as in life, all three were crowded into one casket,
heads together in eternal, cold, petrified gossip. The other two caskets were filled with pebbles
and shells and ravels of gingham. It was a nice service. Everybody cried. 'Those three
inseparables, at last separated,' everybody sobbed.
 'Yes,' said Mr. Benedict, having to hide his face in his grief.
 Not lacking for a sense of justice, Mr. Benedict buried one rich man stark naked. A poor man
he buried wound in gold cloth, with five-dollar gold pieces for buttons and twenty-dollar coins
on each eyelid. A lawyer he did not bury at all, but burnt him in the incinerator — his coffin
contained nothing but a polecat, trapped in the woods one Sunday.
 An old maid, at her service one afternoon, was the victim of a terrible device. Under the silken
comforter, parts of an old man had been buried with her. There she lay, insulted by cold organs,
being made cold love to by hidden hands, hidden and planted other things. The shock showed on
her face, somewhat.
 So Mr. Benedict moved from body to body in his mortuary that afternoon, talking to all the
sheeted figures, telling them his every secret. The final body for the day was the body of one
Merriwell Blythe, an ancient man afflicted with spells and comas. Mr. Blythe had been brought
in for dead several times, but each time had revived in time to prevent premature burial.
 Mr. Benedict pulled back the sheet from Mr. Blythe's face.
 Mr. Merriwell Blythe fluttered his eyes.
 'Ah!' and Mr. Benedict let fall the sheet.
 'You!' screamed the voice under the sheet.
 Mr. Benedict fell against the slab, suddenly shaken and sick.
 'Get me up from here!' cried the voice of Mr. Merriwell Blythe.
 'You're alive!' said Mr. Benedict, jerking aside the sheet.
 'Oh, the thing's I've heard, the things I've listened to the last hour!' wailed the old man on the
slab, rolling his eyes about in his head in white orbits. 'Lying here, not able to move, and hearing
you talk the things you talk! Oh, you dark, dark thing, you awful thing, you fiend, you monster,
get me up from here. I'll tell the mayor and the council and everyone, oh, you dark, dark thing!
You defiler and sadist, you perverted scoundrel, you terrible man, wait'll I tell, I tell on you!'
shrieked the old man, frothing. 'Get me up from here!' 'No!' said Mr. Benedict, falling to his
knees, 'Oh, you terrible man!' sobbed Mr. Merriwell Blythe. 'To think this has gone on in our
town all these years and we never knew the things you did to people! Oh, you monstrous
monster!' 'No,' whispered Mr. Benedict, trying to get up, falling down, palsied and in terror. 'The
things you said,' accused the old man in dry contempt. 'The things you do!' 'Sorry,' whispered
Mr. Benedict.
 The old man tried to rise. 'Don't!' said Mr. Benedict, and held on to him. 'Let go of me!' said
the old man. 'No,' said Mr. Benedict. He reached for a hypodermic and stabbed the old man in
the arm with it. 'You!' cried the old man, wildly, to all the sheeted figures. 'Help me!' He squinted
blindly at the window, at the churchyard below with the leaning stones. 'You, out there, too,
under the stones, help! Listen!' The old man fell back, whistling and frothing. He knew he was
dying. 'All, listen,' he babbled. 'He's done this to me, and you, and you, all of you, he's done too
much, too long. Don't take it! Don't, don't let him do any more to anyone!' The old man licked
away the stuff from his lips, growing weaker. 'Do something to him!' 
 Mr. Benedict stood there, shocked, and said, 'They can't do anything to me. They can't. I say
they can't.'
 'Out of your graves!' wheezed the old man. 'Help me! Tonight, or tomorrow or soon, but jump
up and fix him, oh, this horrible man!' And he wept many tears.
 'How foolish,' said Mr. Benedict numbly. 'You're dying and foolish.' Mr. Benedict could not
move his lips. His eyes were wide. 'Go on and die, now, quickly.'
 'Everybody up!' shouted the old man. 'Everybody out! Help!'
 'Please don't talk any more,' said Mr. Benedict. 'I really don't like to listen.'
 The room was suddenly very dark. It was night. It was getting late. The old man raved on and
on, getting weaker. Finally, smiling, he said, 'They've taken a lot from you, horrible man.
Tonight, they'll do something.'
 The old man died.

 People say there was an explosion that night in the graveyard. Or rather, a series of explosions,
a smell of strange things, a movement, a violence, a raving. There was much light and lightning,
and a kind of rain, and the church bells hammered and slung about in the belfry, and stones
toppled, and things swore oaths, and things flew through the air, and there was a chasing and a
screaming, and many shadows and all the lights in the mortuary blazing on, and things moving
inside and outside in swift jerks and shamblings, windows broke, doors were torn from hinges,
leaves from trees, iron gates clattered, and in the end there was a picture of Mr. Benedict running
about, running about, vanishing, the lights out, suddenly, and a tortured scream that could only
be from Mr. Benedict himself.
 After that — nothing. Quiet.

 The town people entered the mortuary the next morning. They searched the mortuary building
and the church, and then they went out into the graveyard.
 And they found nothing but blood, a vast quantity of blood, sprinkled and thrown and spread
everywhere you could possibly look, as if the heavens had bled profusely in the night.
 But not a sign of Mr. Benedict.
 'Where could he be?' everybody wondered.
 'How should we know?' everybody replied, confounded.
 And then they had the answer.
 Walking through the graveyard they stood in deep tree shadows where the stones, row on row,
were old and time-erased and leaning. No birds sang in the trees. The sunlight which finally
managed to pierce the thick leaves, was like a light bulb illumination, weak, frail, unbelievable,
theatrical, thin.
 They stopped by one tombstone. 'Here, now!' they exclaimed.
 Others paused and bent over the greyish, moss-flecked stone, and cried out.
 Freshly scratched, as if by feebly, frantic, hasty fingers (in fact, as if scratched by fingernails,
the writing was that new) was the name: MR. BENEDICT.
 'Look over here!' someone else cried. Everybody turned. 'This one, this stone, and this one,
and this one, too!' cried the villager, pointing to five other gravestones.
 Everybody hurried around, looking and recoiling.
 Upon each and every stone, scratched by fingernail scratchings, the same message appeared:
 MR. BENEDICT —
 The town people were stunned. 
 'But that's impossible,' objected one of them, faintly. 'He couldn't be buried under all these
gravestones!'
 They stood there for one long moment. Instinctively they all looked at one another nervously
in the silence and the tree darkness. They all waited for an answer. With fumbling, senseless lips,
one of them replied, simply:
 'Couldn't he?' 