All the trouble began when my grandfather died and my grandmother - my father's mother - came to live with us. Relations in the
one house are a strain at the best of times, but, to make matters
worse, my grandmother was a real old countrywoman and quite
unsuited to the life in town. She had a fat, wrinkled old face, and, to
Mother's great indignation, went round the house in bare feet-the
boots had her crippled, she said. For dinner she had a jug of porter
and a pot of potatoes with-some-times-a bit of salt fish, and she
poured out the potatoes on the table and ate them slowly, with
great relish, using her fingers by way of a fork.
Now, girls are supposed to be fastidious, but I was the one who
suffered most from this. Nora, my sister, just sucked up to the old
woman for the penny she got every Friday out of the old-age
pension, a thing I could not do. I was too honest, that was my
trouble; and when I was playing with Bill Connell, the sergeantmajor's son, and saw my grandmother steering up the path with the
jug of porter sticking out from beneath her shawl, I was mortified. I
made excuses not to let him come into the house, because I could
never be sure what she would be up to when we went in.
When Mother was at work and my grandmother made the dinner I
wouldn't touch it. Nora once tried to make me, but I hid under the
table from her and took the bread-knife with me for protection.
Nora let on to be very indignant (she wasn't, of course, but she
knew Mother saw through her, so she sided with Gran) and came
after me. I lashed out at her with the bread-knife, and after that she
left me alone. I stayed there till Mother came in from work and
made my dinner, but when Father came in later, Nora said in a
shocked voice: "Oh, Dadda, do you know what Jackie did at
dinnertime?" Then, of course, it all came out; Father gave me a
flaking; Mother interfered, and for days after that he didn't speak to
me and Mother barely spoke to Nora.
And all because of that old woman ! God knows, I was heartscalded. Then, to crown my misfortunes, I had to make my first
confession and communion. It was an old woman called Ryan who 
prepared us for these. She was about the one age with Gran; she
was well-to-do, lived in a big house on Montenotte, wore a black
cloak and bonnet, and came every day to school at three o'clock
when we should have been going home, and talked to us of hell.
She may have mentioned the other place as well, but that could only
have been by accident, for hell had the first place in her heart.
She lit a candle, took out a new half-crown, and offered it to the
first boy who would hold one finger, only one finger! - in the flame
for five minutes by the school clock. Being always very ambitious I
was tempted to volunteer, but I thought it might look greedy. Then
she asked were we afraid of holding one finger-only one finger! - in
a little candle flame for five minutes and not afraid of burning all
over in roasting hot furnaces for all eternity. "All eternity! Just think
of that! A whole lifetime goes by and it's nothing, not even a drop in
the ocean of your sufferings." The woman was really interesting
about hell, but my attention was all fixed on the half-crown. At the
end of the lesson she put it back in her purse. It was a great
disappointment; a religious woman like that, you wouldn't think
she'd bother about a thing like a half-crown.
Another day she said she knew a priest who woke one night to find
a felllow he didn't recognise leaning over the end of his bed. The
priest was a bit frightened, naturally enough but he asked the
fellow what he wanted, and the fellow said in a deep, husky voice
that he wanted to go to confession. The priest said it was an
awkward time and wouldn't it do in the morning, but the fellow said
that last time he went to confession, there was one sin he kept
back, being ashamed to mention it, and now it was always on his
mind. Then the priest knew it was a bad case, because the fellow
was after making a bad confession and committing a mortal sin. He
got up to dress, and just then the cock crew in the yard outside,
and lo and behold! - when the priest looked round there was no
sign of the fellow, only a smell of burning timber, and when the
priest looked at his bed didn't he see the print of two hands burned
in it? That was because the fellow had made a bad confession. This
story made a shocking impression on me.
But the worst of all was when she showed us how to examine our
conscience. Did we take the name of the Lord, our God, in vain? Did
we honour our father and our mother? (I asked her did this include
grandmothers and she said it did.) Did we love our neighbours as 
ourselves? Did we covet our neighbour 5 goods? (I thought of the
way I felt about the penny that Nora got every Friday.) I decided
that, between one thing and another, I must have broken the whole
ten commandments, all on account of that old woman, and so far as
I could see, so long as she remained in the house, I had no hope of
ever doing anything else.
I was scared to death of confession. The day the whole class went, I
let on to have a toothache, hoping my absence wouldn't be noticed,
but at three o'clock, just as I was feeling safe, along comes a chap
with a message from Mrs. Ryan that I was to go to confession
myself on Saturday and be at the chapel for communion with the
rest. To make it worse, Mother couldn't come with me and sent
Nora instead.
Now, that girl had ways of tormenting me that Mother never knew
of. She held my hand as we went down the hill, smiling sadly and
saying how sorry she was for me, as if she were bringing me to the
hospital for an operation.
"Oh, God help us!" she moaned. "Isn't it a terrible pity you weren't a
good boy? Oh, Jackie, my heart bleeds for you! How will you ever
think of all your sins? Don't forget you have to tell him about the
time you kicked Gran on the shin."
Lemme go! " I said, trying to drag myself free of her. " I don't want
to go to confession at all."
But sure, you'll have to go to confession, Jackie! she replied in the
same regretful tone. "Sure, if you didn't, the parish priest would be
up to the house, looking for you. 'Tisn't, God knows, that I'm not
sorry for you. Do you remember the time you tried to kill me with
the bread-knife under the table? And the language you used to me?
I don't know what he'll do with you at all, Jackie. He might have to
send you up to the bishop."
I remember thinking bitterly that she didn't know the half of what I
had to tell-if I told it. I knew I couldn't tell it, and understood
perfectly why the fellow in Mrs. Ryan's story made a
bad confession; it seemed to me a great shame that people
wouldn't stop criticising him. I remember that steep hill down to the 
church, and the sunlit hillsides beyond the valley of the river, which
I saw in the gaps between the houses like Adam's last glimpse of
Paradise.
Then, when she had manoeuvred me down the long flight of steps
to the chapel yard, Nora suddenly changed her tone. She became
the raging malicious devil she really was.
"There you are ! "she said with a yelp of triumph, hurling me
through the church door. "And I hope he'll give you the penitential
psalms, you dirty little caffler."
I knew then I was lost, given up to eternal justice. The door with the
coloured-glass panels swung shut behind me, the sunlight went out
and gave place to deep shadow, and the wind whistled outside so
that the silence within seemed to crackle like ice under my feet.
Nora sat in front of me by the confession box. There were a couple
of old women ahead of her, and then a miserable-looking poor
devil came and wedged me in at the other side, so that I couldn't
escape even if I had the courage. He joined his hands and rolled his
eyes in the direction of the roof, muttering aspirations in an
anguished tone, and I wondered had he a grandmother too. Only a
grandmother could account for a fellow behaving in that
heartbroken way, but he was better off than I, for he at least could
go and confess his sins; while I would make a bad confession and
then die in the night and be continually coming back and burning
people's furniture.
Nora's turn came, and I heard the sound of something slamming,
and then her voice as if butter wouldn't melt in her mouth, and then
another slam, and out she came. God, the hypocrisy of women! Her
eyes were lowered, her head was bowed, and her hands were joined
very low down on her stomach, and she walked up the aisle to the
side altar looking like a saint. You never saw such an exhibition of
devotion; and I remembered the devilish malice with which she had
tormented me all the way from our door, and wondered were all
religious people like that, really. It was my turn now. With the fear
of damnation in my soul I went in, and the confessional door closed
of itself behind me. It was pitch-dark and I couldn't see priest or
anything else. Then I really began to be frightened. In the darkness
it was a matter between God and me, and He had all the odds. He
knew what my intentions were before I even started; I had no 
chance. All I had ever been told about confession got mixed up in
my mind, and I knelt to one wall and said: "Bless me, father, for I
have sinned; this is my first confession." I waited for a few minutes,
but nothing happened, so I tried it on the other wall. Nothing
happened there either. He had me spotted all right.
It must have been then that I noticed the shelf at about one height
with my head. It was really a place for grown-up people to rest their
elbows, but in my distracted state I thought it was probably the
place you were supposed to kneel. Of course, it was on the high
side and not very deep, but I was always good at climbing and
managed to get up all right. Staying up was the trouble. There was
room only for my knees, and nothing you could get a grip on but a
sort of wooden moulding a bit above it. I held on to the moulding
and repeated the words a little louder, and this time something
happened all right. A slide was slammed back; a little light entered
the box, and a man's voice said "Who's there?"
"Tis me, father," I said for fear he mightn't see me and go away
again. I couldn't see him at all. The place the voice came from was
under the moulding, about level with my knees, so I took a good
grip of the moulding and swung myself down till I saw the
astonished face of a young priest looking up at me. He had to put
his head on one side to see me, and I had to put mine on one side
to see him, so we were more or less talking to one another upsidedown. It struck me as a queer way of hearing confessions, but I
didn't feel it my place to criticise.
"Bless me, father, for I have sinned ; this is my first confession" I
rattled off all in one breath, and swung myself down the least shade
more to make it easier for him.
"What are you doing up there?" he shouted in an angry voice, and
the strain the politeness was putting on my hold of the moulding,
and the shock of being addressed in such an uncivil tone, were too
much for me. I lost my grip, tumbled, and hit the door an
unmerciful wallop before I found myself flat on my back in the
middle of the aisle. The people who had been waiting stood up with
their mouths open. The priest opened the door of the middle box
and came out, pushing his biretta back from his forehead; he
looked something terrible. Then Nora came scampering down the
aisle. 
"Oh, you dirty little caffler! "she said. "I might have known you'd do
it. I might have known you'd disgrace me. I can't leave you out of
my sight for one minute."
Before I could even get to my feet to defend myself she bent down
and gave me a clip across the ear. This reminded me that I was so
stunned I had even forgotten to cry, so that people might think I
wasn't hurt at all, when in fact I was probably maimed for life. I gave
a roar out of me.
"What's all this about? "the priest hissed, getting angrier than ever
and pushing Nora off me. "How dare you hit the child like that, you
little vixen?"
"But I can't do my penance with him, father," Nora cried, cocking an
outraged eye up at him.
"Well, go and do it, or I'll give you some more to do," he said, giving
me a hand up. "Was it coming to confession you were, my poor
man?" he asked me.
"'Twas, father," said I with a sob.
"Oh," he said respectfully, "a big hefty fellow like you must have
terrible sins. Is this your first?"
'Tis, father," said I.
"Worse and worse," he said gloomily. "The crimes of a lifetime. I
don't know will I get rid of you at all today. You'd better wait now
till I'm finished with these old ones. You can see by the looks of
them they haven't much to tell."
"I will, father," I said with something approaching joy.
The relief of it was really enormous. Nora stuck out her tongue at
me from behind his back, but I couldn't even be bothered retorting.
I knew from the very moment that man opened his mouth that he
was intelligent above the ordinary. When I had time to think, I saw
how right I was. It only stood to reason that a fellow confessing
after seven years would have more to tell than people that went 
every week. The crimes of a lifetime, exactly as he said. It was only
what he expected, and the rest was the cackle of old women and
girls with their talk of hell, the bishop, and the penitential psalms.
That was all they knew. I started to make my examination of
conscience, and barring the one bad business of my grandmother,
it didn't seem so bad.
The next time, the priest steered me into the confession box
himself and left the shutter back, the way I could see him get in and
sit down at the further side of the grille from me.
"Well, now," he said, "what do they call you?"
"Jackie, father," said I.
"And what's a-trouble to you, Jackie?"
Father," I said, feeling I might as well get it over while I had him in
good humour, "I had it all arranged to kill my grandmother."
He seemed a bit shaken by that, all right, because he said nothing
for quite a while.
"My goodness," he said at last, "that'd be a shocking thing to do.
What put that into your head?"
Father," I said, feeling very sorry for myself, " she's an awful woman.
Is she? " he asked. " What way is she awful?
She takes porter, father," I said, knowing well from the way Mother
talked of it that this was a mortal sin, and hoping it would make the
priest take a more favourable view of my case.
"Oh, my ! " he said, and I could see he was impressed.
"And snuff, father," said I.
"That's a bad case, sure enough, Jackie," he said.
"And she goes round in her bare feet, father," I went on in a rush of
self-pity, "and she knows I don't like her, and she gives pennies to 
Nora and none to me, and my da sides with her and flakes me, and
one night I was so heart-scalded I made up my mind I'd have to kill
her."
"And what would you do with the body? "he asked with great
interest.
"I was thinking I could chop that up and carry it away in a barrow I
have," I said.
"Begor, Jackie," he said, "do you know you're a terrible child?
"I know, father," I said, for I was just thinking the same thing
myself. "I tried to kill Nora too with a bread-knife under the table,
only I missed her."
Is that the little girl that was beating you just now?" he asked.
Tis, father."
"Someone will go for her with a bread-knife one day, and he won't
miss her," he said rather cryptically. "You must have great courage.
Between ourselves, there's a lot of people I'd like to do the same to,
but I'd never have the nerve. Hanging is an awful death."
Is it, father? "I asked with the deepest interest-I was always very
keen on hanging. "Did you ever see a fellow hanged?"
"Dozens of them," he said solemnly. "And they all died roaring."
"Jay ! " I said.
Oh, a horrible death ! " he said with great satisfaction.
"Lots of the fellows I saw killed their grandmothers too, but they all
said 'twas never worth it."
He had me there for a full ten minutes talking, and then walked out
the chapel yard with me. I was genuinely sorry to part with him,
because he was the most entertaining character I'd ever met in the
religious line. Outside, after the shadow of the church, the sunlight
was like the roaring of waves on a beach; it dazzled me; and when 
the frozen silence melted and I heard the screech of trams on the
road, my heart soared. I knew now I wouldn't die in the night and
come back, leaving marks on my mother's furniture. It would be a
great worry to her, and the poor soul had enough.
Nora was sitting on the railing, waiting for me, and she put on a
very sour puss when she saw the priest with me. She was mad
jealous because a priest had never come out of the church with her.
"Well," she asked coldly, after he left me, "what did he give you?"
"Three Hail Marys," I said.
"Three Hail Marys," she repeated incredulously. "You mustn't have
told him anything."
"I told him everything," I said confidently.
"About Gran and all?"
"About Gran and all."
(All she wanted was to be able to go home and say I'd made a bad
confession.)
"Did you tell him you went for me with the bread-knife?" she asked
with a frown.
"I did to be sure."
"And he only gave you three Hail Marys?"
"That's all."
She slowly got down from the railing with a baffled air. Clearly, this
was beyond her. As we mounted the steps back to the main road,
she looked at me suspiciously.
"What are you sucking?" she asked. Bullseyes."
"Was it the priest gave them to you? 'Twas." 
"Lord God," she wailed bitterly, "some people have all the luck! 'Tis
no advantage to anybody trying to be good. I might just as well be a
sinner like you." 