HER DOCTOR had told Julian's mother that she must lose twenty pounds on account
of her blood pressure, so on Wednesday nights Julian had to take her downtown on the
bus for a reducing class at the Y. The reducing class was designed for working girls over
fifty, who weighed from  to  pounds. His mother was one of the slimmer ones, but
she said ladies did not tell their age or weight. She would not ride the buses by herself at
night since they had been integrated, and because the reducing class was one of her few
pleasures, necessary for her health, and free, she said Julian could at least put himself out
to take her, considering all she did for him. Julian did not like to consider all she did for
him, but every Wednesday night he braced himself and took her.
 She was almost ready to go, standing before the hall mirror, putting on her hat, while
he, his hands behind him, appeared pinned to the door frame, waiting like Saint Sebastian
for the arrows to begin piercing him. The hat was new and had cost her seven dollars and
a half. She kept saying, “Maybe I shouldn't have paid that for it. No, I shouldn't have. I'll
take it off and return it tomorrow. I shouldn't have bought it.”
 Julian raised his eyes to heaven. “Yes, you should have bought it,” he said. “Put it on
and let's go.” It was a hideous hat. A purple velvet flap came down on one side of it and
stood up on the other; the rest of it was green and looked like a cushion with the stuffing
out. He decided it was less comical than jaunty and pathetic. Everything that gave her
pleasure was small and depressed him.
 She lifted the hat one more time and set it down slowly on top of her head. Two wings
of gray hair protruded on either side of her florid face, but her eyes, sky-blue, were as
innocent and untouched by experience as they must have been when she was ten. Were it
not that she was a widow who had struggled fiercely to feed and clothe and put him
through school and who was supporting him still, “until he got on his feet,” she might
have been a little girl that he had to take to town. “It's
all right, it's all right,” he said. “Let's go.” He opened the door himself and started down
the walk to get her going. The sky was a dying violet and the houses stood out darkly
against it, bulbous liver-colored monstrosities of a uniform ugliness though no two were
alike. Since this had been a fashionable neighborhood forty years ago, his mother
persisted in thinking they did well to have an apartment in it. Each house had a narrow
collar of dirt around it in which sat, usually, a grubby child. Julian walked with his hands
in his pockets, his head down and thrust forward and his eyes glazed with the
determination to make himself completely numb during the time he would be sacrificed
to her pleasure.
 The door closed and he turned to find the dumpy figure, surmounted by the atrocious
hat, coming toward him. “Well,” she said, “you only live once and paying a little more
for it, I at least won't meet myself coming and going.”
 “Some day I'll start making money,” Julian said gloomily- he knew he never would -
“and you can have one of those jokes whenever you take the fit.” But first they would
move. He visualized a place where the nearest neighbors would be three miles away on

either side.
 “I think you're doing fine,” she said, drawing on her gloves. “You've only been out of
school a year. Rome wasn't built in a day.”
 She was one of the few members of the Y reducing class who arrived in hat and gloves
and who had a son who had been to college. “It takes time,” she said, “and the world is in
such a mess. This hat looked better on me than any of the others, though when she
brought it out I said, ‘Take that thing back. I wouldn't have it on my head,’ and she said,
‘Now wait till you see it on,’ and when she put it on me, I said, ‘We-ull,’ and she said, ‘If
you ask me, that hat does something for you and you do something for the hat, and
besides,’ she said, ‘with that hat, you won't meet yourself coming and going.’”
 Julian thought he could have stood his lot better if she had been selfish, if she had been
an old hag who drank and screamed at him. He walked along, saturated in depression, as
if in the midst of his martyrdom he had lost his faith. Catching sight of his long,
hopeless, irritated face, she stopped suddenly with a grief-stricken look, and pulled back
on his arm. “Wait on me,” she said. “I'm going back to the house and take this thing off
and tomorrow I'm going to return it. I was out of my head. I can pay the gas bill with that
seven-fifty.”
 He caught her arm in a vicious grip. “You are not going to take it back,” he said. “I like
it.”
 “Well,” she said, “I don't think I ought. . .”
 “Shut up and enjoy it,” he muttered, more depressed than ever.
 “With the world in the mess it's in,” she said, “it's a wonder we can enjoy anything. I
tell you, the bottom rail is on the top.”
 Julian sighed.
 “Of course,” she said, “if you know who you are, you can go anywhere.” She said this
every time he took her to the reducing class. “Most of them in it are not our kind of
people,” she said, “but I can be gracious to anybody. I know who I am.”
 “They don't give a damn for your graciousness,” Julian said savagely. “Knowing who
you are is good for one generation only. You haven't the foggiest idea where you stand
now or who you are.”
 She stopped and allowed her eyes to flash at him. “I most certainly do know who I
am,” she said, “and if you don't know who you are, I'm ashamed of you.”
 “Oh hell,” Julian said.
 “Your great-grandfather was a former governor of this state,” she said. “Your
grandfather was a prosperous landowner. Your grandmother was a Godhigh.”
 “Will you look around you,” he said tensely, “and see where you are now?” and he
swept his arm jerkily out to indicate the neighborhood, which the growing darkness at
least made less dingy.
 “You remain what you are,” she said. “Your great-grand-father had a plantation and
two hundred slaves.”
 “There are no more slaves,” he said irritably.
 “They were better off when they were,” she said. He groaned to see that she was off on
that topic. She rolled onto it every few days like a train on an open track. He knew every
stop, every junction, every swamp along the way, and knew the exact point at which her
conclusion would roil majestically into the station: “It's ridiculous. It's simply not
realistic. They should rise, yes, but on their own side of the fence.”

 “Let's skip it,” Julian said.
 “The ones I feel sorry for,” she said, “are the ones that are half white. They're tragic.”
 “Will you skip it?”
 “Suppose we were half white. We would certainly have mixed feelings.”
 “I have mixed feelings now,” he groaned.
 “Well let's talk about something pleasant,” she said. “I remember going to Grandpa's
when I was a little girl. Then the house had double stairways that went up to what was
really the second floor - all the cooking was done on the first. I used to like to stay down
in the kitchen on account of the way the walls smelled. I would sit with my nose pressed
against the plaster and take deep breaths. Actually the place belonged to the Godhighs but
your grandfather Chestny paid the mortgage and saved it for them. They were in reduced
circumstances,” she said, “but reduced or not, they never forgot who they were.”
 “Doubtless that decayed mansion reminded them,” Julian muttered. He never spoke of
it without contempt or thought of it without longing. He had seen it once when he was a
child before it had been sold. The double stairways had rotted and been torn down.
Negroes were living in it. But it remained in his mind as his mother had known it. It
appeared in his dreams regularly. He would stand on the wide porch, listening to the
rustle of oak leaves, then wander through the high-ceilinged hall into the parlor that
opened onto it and gaze at the worn rugs and faded draperies. It occurred to him that it
was he, not she, who could have appreciated it. He preferred its threadbare elegance to
anything he could name and it was because of it that all the neighborhoods they had lived
in had been a torment to him - whereas she had hardly known the difference. She called
her insensitivity “being adjustable.”
 “And I remember the old darky who was my nurse, Caroline. There was no better
person in the world. I've always had a great respect for my colored friends,” she said. “I’d
do anything in the world for them and they'd. . .”
 “Will you for God's sake get off that subject?” Julian said. When he got on a bus by
himself, he made it a point to sit down beside a Negro, in reparation as it were for his
mother's sins.
 “You're mighty touchy tonight,” she said. “Do you feel all right?”
 “Yes I feel all right” he said. “Now lay off.”
 She pursed her lips. “Well, you certainly are in a vile humor,” she observed “I just
won't speak to you at all.”
 They had reached the bus stop. There was no bus in sight and Julian, his hands still
jammed in his pockets and his head thrust forward, scowled down the empty street. The
frustration of having to wait on the bus as well as ride on it began to creep up his neck
like a hot hand. The presence of his mother was borne in upon him as she gave a pained
sigh. He looked at her bleakly. She was holding herself very erect under the preposterous
hat, wearing it like a banner of her imaginary dignity. There was in him an evil urge to
break her spirit. He suddenly unloosened his tie and pulled it off and put it in his pocket
 She stiffened. “Why must you look like that when you take me to town?” she said.
“Why must you deliberately embarrass me?”
 “If you'll never learn where you are,” he said, “you can at least learn where I am.”
 “You look like a--- thug,” she said.
 “Then I must be one” he murmured.
 “I'll just go home” she said. “I will not bother you. If you can’t do a little thing like that

for me . . .”
 Rolling his eyes upward, he put his tie back on. “Restored to my class,” he muttered.
He thrust his face toward her and hissed, “True culture is in the mind, the mind,” he said,
and tapped his head, “the mind.”
 “It's in the heart,” she said, “and in how you do things and how you do things is
because of who you are.”
 “Nobody in the damn bus cares who you are.”
 “I care who I am” she said icily.
 The lighted bus appeared on top of the next hill and as it approached, they moved out
into the street to meet it. He put his hand under her elbow and hoisted her up on the
creaking step. She entered with a little smile, as if she were going into a drawing room
where everyone had been waiting for her. While he put in the tokens, she sat down on
one of the broad front seats for three which faced the aisle. A thin woman with protruding
teeth and long yellow hair was sitting on the end of it. His mother moved up beside her
and left room for Julian beside herself. He sat down and looked at the floor across the
aisle where a pair of thin feet in red and white canvas sandals were planted.
 His mother immediately began a general conversation meant to attract anyone who felt
like talking. “Can it get any hotter?” she said and removed from her purse a folding fan,
black with a Japanese scene on it, which she began to flutter before her.
 “I reckon it might could,” the woman with the protruding teeth said, “but I know for a
fact my apartment couldn’t get no hotter.”
 “It must get the afternoon sun, " his mother said. She sat forward and looked up and
down the bus. It was half filled. Everybody was white. “I see we have the bus to
ourselves,” she said. Julian cringed.
 “For a change,” said the woman across the aisle, the owner of the red and white canvas
sandals. “I come on one the other day and they were thick as fleas - up front and all
through.”
 “The world is in a mess everywhere,” his mother said. “I don't know how we’ve let it
get in this fix.”
 “What gets my goat is all those boys from good families stealing automobile tires,” the
woman with the protruding teeth said. “I told my boy, I said you may not be rich but you
been raised right and if I ever catch you in any such mess, they can send you on to the
reformatory. Be exactly where you belong.”
 “Training tells,” his mother said. “Is your boy in high school?”
 “Ninth grade,” the woman said.
 “My son just finished college last year. He wants to write but he’s selling typewriters
until he gets started,” his mother said.
 The woman leaned forward and peered at Julian. He threw her such a malevolent look
that she subsided against the seat. On the floor across the aisle there was an abandoned
newspaper. He got up and got it and opened it out in front of him. His mother discreetly
continued the conversation in a lower tone but the woman across the aisle said in a loud
voice, “Well that’s nice. Selling typewriters is close to writing. He can go right from one
to the other.”
 “I tell him,” his mother said, “that Rome wasn't built in a day.”
 Behind the newspaper Julian was withdrawing into the inner compartment of his mind
where he spent most of his time. This was a kind of mental bubble in which he

established himself when he could not bear to be a part of what was going on around him.
From it he could see out and judge but in it he was safe from any kind of penetration
from without. It was the only place where he felt free of the general idiocy of his fellows.
His mother had never entered it but from it he could see her with absolute clarity.
 The old lady was clever enough and he thought that if she had started from any of the
right premises, more might have been expected of her. She lived according to the laws of
her own fantasy world outside of which he had never seen her set foot. The law of it was
to sacrifice herself for him after she had first created the necessity to do so by making a
mess of things. If he had permitted her sacrifices, it was only because her lack of
foresight had made them necessary. All of her life had been a struggle to act like a
Chestny and to give him everything she thought a Chestny ought to have without the
goods a Chestny ought to have; but since, said she, it was fun to struggle, why complain?
And when you had won, as she had won, what fun to look back on the hard times! He
could not forgive her that she had enjoyed the struggle and that she thought she had won.
 What she meant when she said she had won was that she had brought him up
successfully and had sent him to college and that he had turned out so well-good looking
(her teeth had gone unfilled so that his could be straightened), intelligent (he realized he
was too intelligent to be a success), and with a future ahead of him (there was of course
no future ahead of him). She excused his gloominess on the grounds that he was still
growing up and his radical ideas on his lack of practical experience. She said he didn’t
yet know a thing about “life,” that he hadn’t even entered the real world - when already
he was as disenchanted with it as a man of fifty.
 The further irony of all this was that in spite of her, he had turned out so well. In spite
of going to only a third-rate college, he had, on his own initiative, come out with a firstrate education; in spite of growing up dominated by a small mind, he had ended up with a
large one; in spite of all her foolish views, he was free of prejudice and unafraid to face
facts. Most miraculous of all, instead of being blinded by love for her as she was for him,
he had cut himself emotionally free of her and could see her with complete objectivity.
He was not dominated by his mother.
 The bus stopped with a sudden jerk and shook him from his meditation. A woman
from the back lurched forward with little steps and barely escaped falling in his
newspaper as she righted herself. She got off and a large Negro got on. Julian kept his
paper lowered to watch. It gave him a certain satisfaction to see injustice in daily
operation. It confirmed his view that with a few exceptions there was no one worth
knowing within a radius of three hundred miles. The Negro was well dressed and carried
a briefcase. He looked around and then sat down on the other end of the seat where the
woman with the red and white canvas sandals was sitting. He immediately unfolded a
newspaper and obscured himself behind it. Julian’s mother's elbow at once prodded
insistently into his ribs. “Now you see why I won't ride on these buses by myself,” she
whispered.
 The woman with the red and white canvas sandals had risen at the same time the Negro
sat down and had gone farther back in the bus and taken the seat of the woman who had
got off. His mother leaned forward and cast her an approving look.
 Julian rose, crossed the aisle, and sat down in the place of the woman with the canvas
sandals. From this position, he looked serenely across at his mother. Her face had turned
an angry red. He stared at her, making his eyes the eyes of a stranger. He felt his tension

suddenly lift as if he had openly declared war on her.
 He would have liked to get in conversation with the Negro and to talk with him about
art or politics or any subject that would be above the comprehension of those around
them, but the man remained entrenched behind his paper. He was either ignoring the
change of seating or had never noticed it. There was no way for Julian to convey his
sympathy.
 His mother kept her eyes fixed reproachfully on his face. The woman with the
protruding teeth was looking at him avidly as if he were a type of monster new to her.
 “Do you have a light?” he asked the Negro.
 Without looking away from his paper, the man reached in his pocket and handed him a
packet of matches.
 “Thanks,” Julian said. For a moment he held the matches foolishly. A NO SMOKING
sign looked down upon him from over the door. This alone would not have deterred him;
he had no cigarettes. He had quit smoking some months before because he could not
afford it. “Sorry,” he muttered and handed back the matches. The Negro lowered the
paper and gave him an annoyed look. He took the matches and raised the paper again.
 His mother continued to gaze at him but she did not take advantage of his momentary
discomfort. Her eyes retained their battered look. Her face seemed to be unnaturally red,
as if her blood pressure had risen. Julian allowed no glimmer of sympathy to show on his
face. Having got the advantage, he wanted desperately to keep it and carry it through. He
would have liked to teach her a lesson that would last her a while, but there seemed no
way to continue the point. The Negro refused to come out from behind his paper.
 Julian folded his arms and looked stolidly before him, facing her but as if he did not
see her, as if he had ceased to recognize her existence. He visualized a scene in which,
the bus having reached their stop, he would remain in his seat and when she said, “Aren’t
you going to get off?” he would look at her as at a stranger who had rashly addressed
him. The corner they got off on was usually deserted, but it was well lighted and it would
not hurt her to walk by herself the four blocks to the Y. He decided to wait until the time
came and then decide whether or not he would let her get off by herself. He would have
to be at the Y at ten to bring her back, but he could leave her wondering if he was going
to show up. There was no reason for her to think she could always depend on him.
 He retired again into the high-ceilinged room sparsely settled with large pieces of
antique furniture. His soul expanded momentarily but then he became aware of his
mother across from him and the vision shriveled. He studied her coldly. Her feet in little
pumps dangled like a child’s and did not quite reach the floor. She was training on him an
exaggerated look of reproach. He felt completely detached from her. At that moment he
could with pleasure have slapped her as he would have slapped a particularly obnoxious
child in his charge.
 He began to imagine various unlikely ways by which he could teach her a lesson. He
might make friends with some distinguished Negro professor or lawyer and bring him
home to spend the evening. He would be entirely justified but her blood pressure would
rise to . He could not push her to the extent of making her have a stroke, and
moreover, he had never been successful at making any Negro friends. He had tried to
strike up an acquaintance on the bus with some of the better types, with ones that looked
like professors or ministers or lawyers. One morning he had sat down next to a
distinguished-looking dark brown man who had answered his questions with a sonorous

solemnity but who had turned out to be an undertaker. Another day he had sat down
beside a cigar-smoking Negro with a diamond ring on his finger, but after a few stilted
pleasantries, the Negro had rung the buzzer and risen, slipping two lottery tickets into
Julian's hand as he climbed over him to leave.
 He imagined his mother lying desperately ill and his being able to secure only a Negro
doctor for her. He toyed with that idea for a few minutes and then dropped it for a
momentary vision of himself participating as a sympathizer in a sit-in demonstration.
This was possible but he did not linger with it. Instead, he approached the ultimate horror.
He brought home a beautiful suspiciously Negroid woman. Prepare yourself, he said.
There is nothing you can do about it. This is the woman I've chosen. She’s intelligent,
dignified, even good, and she’s suffered and she hasn’t thought it fun. Now persecute us,
go ahead and persecute us. Drive her out of here, but remember, you’re driving me too.
His eyes were narrowed and through the indignation he had generated, he saw his mother
across the aisle, purple-faced, shrunken to the dwarf-like proportions of her moral nature,
sitting like a mummy beneath the ridiculous banner of her hat.
 He was tilted out of his fantasy again as the bus stopped. The door opened with a
sucking hiss and out of the dark a large, gaily dressed, sullen-looking colored woman got
on with a little boy. The child, who might have been four, had on a short plaid suit and a
Tyrolean hat with a blue feather in it. Julian hoped that he would sit down beside him and
that the woman would push in beside his mother. He could think of no better
arrangement.
 As she waited for her tokens, the woman was surveying the seating possibilities - he
hoped with the idea of sitting where she was least wanted. There was something familiarlooking about her but Julian could not place what it was. She was a giant of a woman.
Her face was set not only to meet opposition but to seek it out. The downward tilt of her
large lower lip was like a warning sign: DON’T TAMPER WITH ME. Her bulging
figure was encased in a green crepe dress and her feet overflowed in red shoes. She had
on a hideous hat. A purple velvet flap came down on one side of it and stood up on the
other; the rest of it was green and looked like a cushion with the stuffing out. She carried
a mammoth red pocketbook that bulged throughout as if it were stuffed with rocks.
 To Julian's disappointment, the little boy climbed up on the empty seat beside his
mother. His mother lumped all children, black and white, into the common category,
“cute,” and she thought little Negroes were on the whole cuter than little white children.
She smiled at the little boy as he climbed on the seat.
 Meanwhile the woman was bearing down upon the empty seat beside Julian. To his
annoyance, she squeezed herself into it. He saw his mother's face change as the woman
settled herself next to him and he realized with satisfaction that this was more
objectionable to her than it was to him. Her face seemed almost gray and there was a look
of dull recognition in her eyes, as if suddenly she had sickened at some awful
confrontation. Julian saw that it was because she and the woman had, in a sense, swapped
sons. Though his mother would not realize the symbolic significance of this, she would
feel it. His amusement showed plainly on his face.
 The woman next to him muttered something unintelligible to herself.
 He was conscious of a kind of bristling next to him, a muted growling like that of an
angry cat. He could not see anything but the red pocketbook upright on the bulging green
thighs. He visualized the woman as she had stood waiting for her tokens-the ponderous

figure, rising from the red shoes upward over the solid hips, the mammoth bosom, the
haughty face, to the green and purple hat.
 His eyes widened.
 The vision of the two hats, identical, broke upon him with the radiance of a brilliant
sunrise. His face was suddenly lit with joy. He could not believe that Fate had thrust upon
his mother such a lesson. He gave a loud chuckle so that she would look at him and see
that he saw. She turned her eyes on him slowly. The blue in them seemed to have turned
a bruised purple. For a moment he had an uncomfortable sense of her innocence, but it
lasted only a second before principle rescued him. Justice entitled him to laugh. His grin
hardened until it said to her as plainly as if he were saying aloud: Your punishment
exactly fits your pettiness. This should teach you a permanent lesson.
 Her eyes shifted to the woman. She seemed unable to bear looking at him and to find
the woman preferable. He became conscious again of the bristling presence at his side.
The woman was rumbling like a volcano about to become active. His mother's mouth
began to twitch slightly at one corner. With a sinking heart, he saw incipient signs of
recovery on her face and realized that this was going to strike her suddenly as funny and
was going to be no lesson at all. She kept her eyes on the woman and an amused smile
came over her face as if the woman were a monkey that had stolen her hat. The little
Negro was looking up at her with large fascinated eyes. He had been trying to attract her
attention for some time.
 “Carver!” the woman said suddenly. “Come heah!”
 When he saw that the spotlight was on him at last, Carver drew his feet up and turned
himself toward Julian’s mother and giggled.
 “Carver!” the woman said. “You heah me? Come heah!”
 Carver slid down from the seat but remained squatting with his back against the base
of it, his head turned slyly around toward Julian's mother, who was smiling at him. The
woman reached a hand across the aisle and snatched him to her. He righted himself and
hung backwards on her knees, grinning at Julian's mother. “Isn’t he cute?” Julian's
mother said to the woman with the protruding teeth.
 “I reckon he is,” the woman said without conviction.
 The Negress yanked him upright but he eased out of her grip and shot across the aisle
and scrambled, giggling wildly, onto the seat beside his love.
 “I think he likes me,” Julian's mother said, and smiled at the woman. It was the smile
she used when she was being particularly gracious to an inferior. Julian saw everything
lost. The lesson had rolled off her like rain on a roof.
 The woman stood up and yanked the little boy off the seat as if she were snatching him
from contagion. Julian could feel the rage in her at having no weapon like his mother's
smile. She gave the child a sharp slap across his leg. He howled once and then thrust his
head into her stomach and kicked his fret against her shins. “Be-have,” she said
vehemently.
 The bus stopped and the Negro who had been reading the newspaper got off. The
woman moved over and set the little boy down with a thump between herself and Julian.
She held him firmly by the knee. In a moment he put his hands in front of his face and
peeped at Julian's mother through his fingers.
 “I see yoooooooo !” she said and put her hand in front of her face and peeped at him.
 The woman slapped his hand down. “Quit yo’ foolishness,” she said, “before I knock

the living Jesus out of you!”
 Julian was thankful that the next stop was theirs. He reached up and pulled the cord.
The woman reached up and pulled it at the same time. Oh my God, he thought. He had
the terrible intuition that when they got off the bus together, his mother would open her
purse and give the little boy a nickel. The gesture would be as natural to her as breathing.
The bus stopped and the woman got up and lunged to the front, dragging the child, who
wished to stay on, after her. Julian and his mother got up and followed. As they neared e
door, Julian tried to relieve her of her pocketbook.
 “No,” she murmured, “I want to give the little boy a nickel.”
 “No!” Julian hissed. “No!”
 She smiled down at the child and opened her bag. The bus door opened and the woman
picked him up by the arm and descended with him, hanging at her hip. Once in the street
she set him down and shook him.
 Julian's mother had to close her purse while she got down the bus step but as soon as
her feet were on the ground, she opened it again and began to rummage inside. “I can’t
find but a penny,” she whispered, “but it looks like a new one.”
 “Don’t do it!” Julian said fiercely between his teeth. There was a streetlight on the
corner and she hurried to get under it so that she could better see into her pocketbook.
The woman was heading off rapidly down the street with the child still hanging backward
on her hand.
 “Oh little boy!” Julian's mother called and took a few quick steps and caught up with
them just beyond the lamppost. “Here’s a bright new penny for you,” and she held out the
coin, which shone bronze in the dim light.
 The huge woman turned and for a moment stood, her shoulders lifted and her face
frozen with frustrated rage, and stared at Julian’s mother. Then all at once she seemed to
explode like a piece of machinery that had been given one ounce of pressure too much.
Julian saw the black fist swing out with the red pocketbook. He shut his eyes and cringed
as he heard the woman shout, “He don't take nobody’s pennies!” When he opened his
eyes, the woman was disappearing down the street with the little boy staring wide-eyed
over her shoulder. Julian’s mother was sitting on the sidewalk.
 “I told you not to do that,” Julian said angrily. “I told you not to do that!”
 He stood over her for a minute, gritting his teeth. Her legs were stretched out in front
of her and her hat was on her lap. He squatted down and looked her in the face. It was
totally expressionless. “You got exactly what you deserved,” he said. “Now get up.”
 He picked up her pocketbook and put what had fallen out back in it. He picked the hat
up off her lap. The penny caught his eye on the sidewalk and he picked that up and let it
drop before her eyes into the purse. Then he stood up and leaned over and held his hands
out to pull her up. She remained immobile. He sighed. Rising above them on either side
were black apartment buildings, marked with irregular rectangles of light. At the end of
the block a man came out of a door and walked off in the opposite direction. “All right,”
he said, “suppose somebody happens by and wants to know why you’re sitting on the
sidewalk?”
 She took the hand and, breathing hard, pulled heavily up on it and then stood for a
moment, swaying slightly as if the spots of light in the darkness were circling around her.
Her eyes, shadowed and confused, finally settled on his face. He did not try to conceal his
irritation. “I hope this teaches you a lesson,” he said. She leaned forward and her eyes

raked his face. She seemed trying to determine his identity. Then, as if she found nothing
familiar about him, she started off with a headlong movement in the wrong direction.
 “Aren’t you going on to the Y?” he asked.
 “Home,” she muttered.
 “Well, are we walking?”
 For answer she kept going. Julian followed along, his hands behind him. He saw no
reason to let the lesson she had had go without backing it up with an explanation of its
meaning. She might as well be made to understand what had happened to her. “Don’t
think that was just an uppity Negro woman,” he said. “That was the whole colored race
which will no longer take your condescending pennies. That was your black double. She
can wear the same hat as you, and to be sure,” he added gratuitously (because he thought
it was funny), “it looked better on her than it did on you. What all this means,” he said,
“is that the old world is gone. The old manners are obsolete and your graciousness is not
worth a damn.” He thought bitterly of the house that had been lost for him. “You aren’t
who you think you are,” he said.
 She continued to plow ahead, paying no attention to him. Her hair had come undone on
one side. She dropped her pocketbook and took no notice. He stooped and picked it up
and handed it to her but she did not take it.
 ”You needn’t act as if the world had come to an end,” he aid, “because it hasn’t. From
now on you’ve got to live in a new world and face a few realities for a change. Buck up,”
he said, “it won't kill you.”
 She was breathing fast.
 “Let's wait on the bus,” he said.
 “Home,” she said thickly.
 “I hate to see you behave like this,” he said. “Just like a child. I should be able to
expect more of you.” He decided to stop where he was and make her stop and wait for a
bus. “I'm not going any farther,” he said, stopping. “We’re going on the bus.”
 She continued to go on as if she had not heard him. He took a few steps and caught her
arm and stopped her. He looked into her face and caught his breath. He was looking into
a face he had never seen before. “Tell Grandpa to come get me,” she said.
 He stared, stricken.
 “Tell Caroline to come get me,” she said.
 Stunned, he let her go and she lurched forward again, walking as if one leg were
shorter than the other. A tide of darkness seemed to be sweeping her from him.
“Mother!” he cried. “Darling, sweetheart, wait!” Crumpling, she fell to the pavement. He
dashed forward and fell at her side, crying, “Mamma, Mamma!” He turned her over. Her
face was fiercely distorted. One eye, large and staring, moved slightly to the left as if it
had become unmoored. The other remained fixed on him, raked his face again, found
nothing and closed.
 “Wait here, wait here!” he cried and jumped up and began to run for help toward a
cluster of lights he saw in the distance ahead of him. “Help, help!” he shouted, but his
voice was thin, scarcely a thread of sound. The lights drifted farther away the faster he
ran and his feet moved numbly as if they carried him nowhere. The tide of darkness
seemed to sweep him back to her, postponing from moment to moment his entry into the
world of guilt and sorrow. 