She waved at me across a crowded room at the St. Regis Hotel in New York. I waved
back, realizing I knew the face but unable to place it. She squeezed past waiters and
guests and had reached me before I had the chance to ask anyone who she was. I racked
that section of my brain that is meant to store people, but it transmitted no reply. I
realized I would have to resort to the old party trick of carefully worded questions until
her answers jogged my memory.
“How are you, darling?” she cried, and threw her arms around me, an opening
that didn’t help, since we were at a Literary Guild cocktail party, and anyone will throw
their arms around you on such occasions, even the directors of the Book-of-the-Month
Club. From her accent she was clearly American, and she looked to be approaching forty
but thanks to the genius of modern make-up may even have overtaken it. She wore a long
white cocktail dress and her blonde hair was done up in one of those buns that looks like
a brioche. The overall effect made her appear somewhat like a chess queen. Not that the
cottage loaf helped, because she might have had dark hair flowing to her shoulders when
we last met. I do wish women would realize that when they change their hairstyle they
often achieve exactly what they set out to do: look completely different to any
unsuspecting male.
“I’m well, thank you,” I said to the white queen. “And you?” I inquired as my
opening gambit.
“I’m just fine, darling,” she replied, taking a glass of champagne from a passing
waiter.
“And how’s the family,” I asked, not sure if she even had one.
“They’re all well,” she replied. No help there. “And how is Louise?” she inquired.
“Blooming,” I said. So she knew my wife. But then, not necessarily, I thought.
Most American women are experts at remembering men’s wives. They have to be, when
on the New York circuit they change so often it becomes a greater challenge than the
Times crossword.
“Have you been to London lately?” I roared above the babble. A brave question,
as she may never have been to Europe.
“Only once since we had lunch together.” She looked at me quizzically. “You
don’t remember who I am, do you?” she asked as she devoured a cocktail sausage.
I smiled.
“Don’t be silly, Susan,” I said. “How could I ever forget?”
She smiled.
I confess that I remembered the white queen’s name in the nick of time. Although
I still only had vague recollections of the lady, I certainly would never forget the lunch.
I had just had my first book published, and the critics on both sides of the Atlantic had
been complimentary, even if the checks from my publishers were less so. My agent had
told me on several occasions that I shouldn’t write if I wanted to make money. This
created a dilemma, because I couldn’t see how to make money if I didn’t write.
It was around this time that the lady who was now facing me and chattering on,
oblivious to my silence, telephoned from New York to heap lavish praise on my novel.
There is no writer who does enjoy receiving such calls, although I confess to having been
less captivated by an eleven-year-old girl who called me collect from California to say
she had found a spelling mistake on page 47 and warned that she would call again if she
found another. However, this particular lady might have ended her transatlantic
congratulations with nothing more than good-bye if she had not dropped her own name.
It was one of those names that can, on the spur of the moment, always book a table at a
chic restaurant or a seat at the opera, which mere mortals like myself would have found
impossible to attain given a months notice. To be fair, it was her husband’s name that had
achieved the reputation, as one of the world’s most distinguished film producers.
“When I’m next in London you must have lunch with me,” came crackling down
the phone.
“No,” said I gallantly, “you must have lunch with me.”
“How perfectly charming you English always are,” she said.
I have often wondered how much American women get away with when they say
those few words to an Englishman. Nevertheless, the wife of an Oscar-winning producer
does not phone one everyday.
“I promise to call you when I’m next in London,” she said.
And indeed she did, for almost six months to the day she telephoned again, this
time from the Connaught Hotel, to declare how much she was looking forward to our
meeting.
“Where would you like to have lunch?” I said, realizing a second too late, when
she replied with the name of one of the most exclusive restaurants in town, that I should
have made sure it was I who chose the venue. I was glad she couldn’t see my forlorn face
as she added airly, “Monday, one o’clock. Leave the booking to me—I’m known there.”
On the day in question I donned my one respectable suit, a new shirt I had been
saving for a special occasion since Christmas, and the only tie that looked as if it hadn’t
been previously used to hold up my trousers. I then strolled over to my bank and asked
for statement of my current account. The teller handed me a long piece of paper unworthy
of its amount. I studied the figure as one who has to make a major financial decision. The
bottom stating in black lettering that I was in credit to the sum of thirty-seven pounds and
sixty-three pence. I wrote out a check for thirty-seven pounds. I feel that the gentleman
should always leave his account in credit, and I might add it was a belief my bank
manager shared with me. I then walked up to Mayfair for my luncheon date.
As I entered the restaurant I noticed too many waiters and plush seats for my
liking. You can’t eat either, but you can be charged for them. At a corner table sat for two
sat a woman who, although not young, was elegant. She wore a blouse of powder blue
crepe-de-chine, and her blond hair was rolled away from her face in style that reminded
me of the war years and had once again become fashionable. It was clearly my
transatlantic admirer, and she greeted me in the same “I’ve known you all my life” as she
was to do at the Literary Guild cocktail party years later. Although she had a drink in
front of her, I didn’t order an aperitif, explaining that I never drank before lunch—and I
would have liked to add, “but as soon as your husband makes a film of my novel, I will.”
She launched immediately into the latest Hollywood gossip, not so much
dropping names as reciting them, while I ate my way through the potato chips from the
bowl in front of me. A few minutes later a waiter materialized by the table and presented
us with two large embossed leather menus, considerably better bound than my novel. The
place positively reeked of unnecessary expense. I opened the menu and studied the first
chapter with horror; it was eminently put-downable. I had no idea that simple food
obtained from Covent Garden could cost quite so much by merely being transported to
Mayfair. I could have bought her the same dishes for a quarter of the price at my favorite
bistro, a mere one hundred yards away, and to add to my discomfort I observed that it
was one of those restaurants where the guest menu made no mention of the prices. I
settled down to study the long list of French dishes, which only served to remind me that
I hadn’t eaten well for more than a month, a state of affairs that was about to be
prolonged by a further day. I remembered my bank balance morosely reflected that I
would probably have to wait until my agent sold the Icelandic rights of my novel before I
could afford a square meal again.
“What would you like?” I said gallantly.
“I always enjoy a light lunch,” she volunteered. I sighed with premature relief,
only to find that “light” did not necessarily mean inexpensive.
She smiled sweetly up at the waiter, who looked as though he wouldn’t be
wondering where his next meal might be coming from, and ordered just a sliver of
smoked salmon, followed by two tiny tender lamb cutlets. Then she hesitated, but only
for a moment, before adding “and a side salad.”
I studied the menu with some caution, running my finger down the prices, not the
dishes.
“I also eat light lunch,” I said mendaciously. “The chef’s salad will be quite
enough for me.” The waiter was obviously affronted but left peaceably.
She chatted of Coppola and Preminger, of Pacino and Redford, and of Garbo as if
she saw her all the time. She was kind enough to stop for a moment and ask what I was
working on at present. I would have liked to have replied, “On how I’m going to explain
to my wife that I have only sixty-three pence left in the bank,” but I actually discussed
my ideas for another novel. She seemed impressed but still made no reference to her
husband. Should I mention him? No. Mustn’t sound pushy, or as though I needed the
money.
The food arrived, or that is to say her smoked salmon did, and I sat silently
watching her eat my bank account while I nibbled on a roll. I looked up only to discover
a wine waiter by my side.
“Would you care for some wine?” said I, recklessly.
“No, I don’t think so,” she said. I smiled a little too soon: “Well, perhaps a little
something white and dry.”
The wine waiter handed down a second leather-bound book, this time with golden
grapes embossed on the cover. I searched down the pages for half-bottles, explaining to
my guest that I never drank at lunch. I chose the cheapest. The wine waiter appeared a
moment later with a large silver bucket full of ice in which the half bottle looked
drowned, and, like me, completely out of its depth. A junior waiter cleared away the
empty plate while another wheeled a large trolley to the side of our table and served the
lamb cutlets and the chef’s salad. At the same time a third waiter made up an exquisite
side salad for my guest that ended up bigger than my complete order. I didn’t feel I could
ask her to swap.
To be fair, the chef’s salad was superb—although I confess it was hard to
appreciate such food fully while trying to work out a plot that would be convincing if I
found the bill to over thirty-seven pounds.
“How silly of me to ask for white wine with lamb,” she said, having nearly
finished the half bottle. I ordered a half bottle of the house red without calling for the
wine list.
She finished the white wine and then launched into the theater, music, and other
authors. All those who were still alive she seemed to know, and those who were dead she
hadn’t read. I might have enjoyed the performance if it hadn’t been for the fear of
wondering if I would be able to afford it when the curtain came down. When the waiter
cleared away the empty dishes he asked my guest if she would care for anything else.
“No, thank you,” she said—I nearly applauded. “Unless you have one of your
famous apple surprises.”
“I fear the last one may have gone, madam, but I’ll go and see.”
“Don’t hurry,” I wanted to say, but instead I just smiled as the rope tightened
around my neck. A few minutes later the waiter strode back in triumph, weaving between
the tables holding the apple surprise in the palm of his hand, high above his head. I
prayed to Newton that the apple would obey his law. It didn’t.
“The last one, madam”
“Oh, what luck,” she declared.
“Oh, what luck,” I repeated, unable to face the menu and discover the price. I was
now attempting some mental arithmetic as I realized it was going to be a close-run thing.
“Anything else, madam?” the ingratiating waiter inquired.
I took a deep breath.
“Just coffee,” she said.
“And for you, sir?”
“No, no, not for me.” He left us. I couldn’t think of an explanation for why I
didn’t drink coffee. Then she produced the large Gucci bag by her side and a copy of my
novel, which I signed with a flourish, hoping the head waiter would see, and feel I was
the sort of man who should be allowed to sign the bill as well, but he resolutely remained
at the far end of the room while I wrote the words “An unforgettable meeting” and
appended my signature.
While the dear lady was drinking her coffee I picked at another roll and called for
the bill, not because I was in any particular hurry, but like a guilty defendant at the Old
Bailey, I preferred to wait no longer than the judge’s sentence. A man in a smart green
uniform whom I had never seen before appeared carrying a silver tray with a folded piece
of paper on it, looking not unlike my bank statement. I pushed back the edge of the bill
slowly and read the figure: thirty-six pounds and forty pence. I casually put my hand into
my inside pocket and withdrew my life’s possessions, then placed the crisp new notes on
the silver tray. They were whisked away. The man in the green uniform appeared a few
minutes later with my sixty pence change, which I pocketed, since it was the only way I
was going to get a bus home. The waiter gave me a look that would have undoubtedly
won him a character part in any film produced by the lady’s distinguished husband.
My guest rose and walked across the restaurant, waving at, and occasionally
kissing, people I had previously seen only in glossy magazines. When she reached the
door she stopped to receive her coat, a mink. I helped her on with the fur, again failing to
leave a tip. As we stood on the Curzon Street sidewalk, a dark blue Rolls-Royce drew up
beside us and a liveried chauffeur leaped out and opened the door. She climbed in.
“Goodbye, darling,” she said as the electric window slid down. “Thank you for
such a lovely lunch.”
“Goodbye,” I said and, summoning up my courage, added: “I do hope when you
are next in town I shall have the opportunity of meeting your distinguished husband.”
“Oh, darling, didn’t you know?” she said.
“Know what?”
“We were divorced ages ago.”
“Divorced?” said I.
“Oh, yes,” she said gaily, “I haven’t spoken to him for years.”
I just stood there looking helpless.
“Oh, don’t worry yourself on my account,” she said. “He’s no loss. In any case, I
recently married again” –another film producer, I prayed—“in fact, I quite expected to
bump into my husband today—you see, he owns the restaurant.”
Without another word the electric window purred up and the Rolls-Royce glided
effortlessly out of sight, leaving me to walk to the nearest bus stop.
As I stood surrounded by Literary Guild guests, staring at the white queen with the
Brioche bun, I could still see her drifting away in that blue Rolls-Royce. I tried to
concentrate on her words.
“I knew you wouldn’t forget me, darling,” she was saying. “After all, I did take
you to lunch, didn’t I?”