GENERAL SASH was a hundred and four years old. He lived with his
granddaughter, Sally Poker Sash, who was sixty-two years old and who prayed
every night on her knees that he would live until her graduation from college. The
General didn’t give two slaps for her graduation but he never doubted he would
live for it. Living had got to be such a habit with him that he couldn’t conceive of
any other condition. A graduation exercise was not exactly his idea of a good
time, even if, as she said, he would be expected to sit on the stage in his uniform.
She said there would be a long procession of teachers and students in their robes
but that there wouldn’t be anything to equal him in his uniform. He knew this well
enough without her telling him, and as for the damn procession, it could march to
hell and back and not cause him a quiver. He liked parades with floats full of
Miss Americas and Miss Daytona Beaches and Miss Queen Cotton Products. He
didn’t have any use for processions and a procession full of schoolteachers was
about as deadly as the River Styx to his way of thinking. However, he was willing
to sit on the stage in his uniformso that they could see him.
Sally Poker was not as sure as he was that he would live until her graduation.
There had not been any perceptible change in him for the last five years, but she
had the sense that she might be cheated out of her triumph because she so often
was. She had been going to summer school every year for the past twenty because
when she started teaching, there were no such things as degrees. In those times,
she said, everything was normal but nothing had been normal since she was
sixteen, and for the past twenty summers, when she should have been resting, she
had had to take a trunk in the burning heat to the state teacher’s college; and though
when she returned in the fall, she always taught in the exact way she had been
taught not to teach, this was a mild revenge that didn’t satisfy her sense of justice.
She wanted the General at her graduation because she wanted to show what she
stood for, or, as she said, “what all was behind her,” and was not behind them.
This them was not anybody in particular. It was just all the upstarts who had
turned the world on its head and unsettled the ways of decent living.
She meant to stand on that platform in August with the General sitting in his
wheel chair on the stage behind her and she meant to hold her head very high as if
she were saying, “See him! See him! My kin, all you upstarts! Glorious upright old
man standing for the old traditions! Dignity! Honor! Courage! See him!” One night
in her sleep she screamed, “See him! See him!” and turned her head and found him
sitting in his wheel chair behind her with a terrible expression on his face and
with all his clothes off except the general’s hat and she had waked up and had not
dared to go back to sleep again that night.
For his part, the General would not have consented even to attend her
graduation if she had not promised to see to it that he sit on the stage. He liked to
sit on any stage. He considered that he was still a very handsome man. When he
had been able to stand up, he had measured five feet four inches of pure game
cock. He had white hair that reached to his shoulders behind and he would not
wear teeth because he thought his profile was more striking without them. When
he put on his full-dress general’s uniform, he knew well enough that there was
nothing to match himanywhere.
This was not the same uniform he had worn in the War between the States. He
had not actually been a general in that war. He had probably been a foot soldier;
he didn’t remember what he had been; in fact, he didn’t remember that war at all.
It was like his feet, which hung down now shriveled at the very end of him,
without feeling, covered with a blue-gray afghan that Sally Poker had crocheted
when she was a little girl. He didn’t remember the Spanish-American War in
which he had lost a son; he didn’t even remember the son. He didn’t have any use
for history because he never expected to meet it again. To his mind, history was
connected with processions and life with parades and he liked parades. People
were always asking him if he remembered this or that—a dreary black procession
of questions about the past. There was only one event in the past that had any
significance for him and that he cared to talk about: that was twelve years ago
when he had received the general’s uniformand had been in the premiere.
“I was in that preemy they had in Atlanta,” he would tell visitors sitting on his
front porch. “Surrounded by beautiful guls. It wasn’t a thing local about it. It was
nothing local about it. Listen here. It was a nashnul event and they had me in it—
up onto the stage. There was no bob-tails at it. Every person at it had paid ten
dollars to get in and had to wear his tuxseeder. I was in this uniform. A beautiful
gul presented me with it that afternoon in a hotel room.”
“It was in a suite in the hotel and I was in it too, Papa,” Sally Poker would
say, winking at the visitors. “You weren’t alone with any young lady in a hotel
room.”
“Was, I’d a known what to do,” the old General would say with a sharp look
and the visitors would scream with laughter. “This was a Hollywood, California,
gul,” he’d continue. “She was from Hollywood, California, and didn’t have any
part in the pitcher. Out there they have so many beautiful guls that they don’t need
that they call them a extra and they don’t use them for nothing but presenting
people with things and having their pitchers taken. They took my pitcher with her.
No, it was two of them. One on either side and me in the middle with my arms
around each of them’s waist and their waist ain’t any bigger than a half a dollar.”
Sally Poker would interrupt again. “It was Mr. Govisky that gave you the
uniform, Papa, and he gave me the most exquisite corsage. Really, I wish you
could have seen it. It was made with gladiola petals taken off and painted gold
and put back together to look like a rose. It was exquisite. I wish you could have
seen it, it was…”
“It was as big as her head,” the General would snarl. “I was tellin it. They
gimme this uniform and they gimme this soward and they say, ‘Now General, we
don’t want you to start a war on us. All we want you to do is march right up on
that stage when you’re innerduced tonight and answer a few questions. Think you
can do that?’ ‘Think I can do it!’ I say. ‘Listen here. I was doing things before you
were born,’ and they hollered.”
“He was the hit of the show,” Sally Poker would say, but she didn’t much like
to remember the premiere on account of what had happened to her feet at it. She
had bought a new dress for the occasion—a long black crepe dinner dress with a
rhinestone buckle and a bolero—and a pair of silver slippers to wear with it,
because she was supposed to go up on the stage with himto keep himfromfalling.
Everything was arranged for them. A real limousine came at ten minutes to eight
and took themto the theater. It drew up under the marquee at exactly the right time,
after the big stars and the director and the author and the governor and the mayor
and some less important stars. The police kept traffic from jamming and there
were ropes to keep the people off who couldn’t go. All the people who couldn’t
go watched them step out of the limousine into the lights. Then they walked down
the red and gold foyer and an usherette in a Confederate cap and little short skirt
conducted themto their special seats. The audience was already there and a group
of UDC members began to clap when they saw the General in his uniform and that
started everybody to clap. A few more celebrities came after them and then the
doors closed and the lights went down.
A young man with blond wavy hair who said he represented the motionpicture industry came out and began to introduce everybody and each one who
was introduced walked up on the stage and said how really happy he was to be
here for this great event. The General and his granddaughter were introduced
sixteenth on the program. He was introduced as General Tennessee Flintrock Sash
of the Confederacy, though Sally Poker had told Mr. Govisky that his name was
George Poker Sash and that he had only been a major. She helped him up from his
seat but her heart was beating so fast she didn’t know whether she’d make it
herself.
The old man walked up the aisle slowly with his fierce white head high and
his hat held over his heart. The orchestra began to play the Confederate Battle
Hymn very softly and the UDC members rose as a group and did not sit down
again until the General was on the stage. When he reached the center of the stage
with Sally Poker just behind him guiding his elbow, the orchestra burst out in a
loud rendition of the Battle Hymn and the old man, with real stage presence, gave
a vigorous trembling salute and stood at attention until the last blast had died
away. Two of the usherettes in Confederate caps and short skirts held a
Confederate and a Union flag crossed behind them.
The General stood in the exact center of the spotlight and it caught a weird
moon-shaped slice of Sally Poker—the corsage, the rhinestone buckle and one
hand clenched around a white glove and handkerchief. The young man with the
blond wavy hair inserted himself into the circle of light and said he was really
happy to have here tonight for this great event, one, he said, who had fought and
bled in the battles they would soon see daringly reacted on the screen, and “Tell
me, General,” he asked, “how old are you?”
“Niiiiiinnttty-two!” the General screamed.
The young man looked as if this were just about the most impressive thing that
had been said all evening. “Ladies and gentlemen,” he said, “let’s give the
General the biggest hand we’ve got!” and there was applause immediately and the
young man indicated to Sally Poker with a motion of his thumb that she could take
the old man back to his seat now so that the next person could be introduced; but
the General had not finished. He stood immovable in the exact center of the
spotlight, his neck thrust forward, his mouth slightly open, and his voracious gray
eyes drinking in the glare and the applause. He elbowed his granddaughter roughly
away. “How I keep so young,” he screeched, “I kiss all the pretty guls!”
This was met with a great din of spontaneous applause and it was at just that
instant that Sally Poker looked down at her feet and discovered that in the
excitement of getting ready she had forgotten to change her shoes: two brown Girl
Scout oxfords protruded fromthe bottomof her dress. She gave the General a yank
and almost ran with him off the stage. He was very angry that he had not got to say
how glad he was to be here for this event and on the way back to his seat, he kept
saying as loud as he could, “I’m glad to be here at this preemy with all these
beautiful guls!” but there was another celebrity going up the other aisle and
nobody paid any attention to him. He slept through the picture, muttering fiercely
every now and then in his sleep.
Since then, his life had not been very interesting. His feet were completely
dead now, his knees worked like old hinges, his kidneys functioned when they
would, but his heart persisted doggedly to beat. The past and the future were the
same thing to him, one forgotten and the other not remembered; he had no more
notion of dying than a cat. Every year on Confederate Memorial Day, he was
bundled up and lent to the Capitol City Museum where he was displayed from one
to four in a musty room full of old photographs, old uniforms, old artillery, and
historic documents. All these were carefully preserved in glass cases so that
children would not put their hands on them. He wore his general’s uniform from
the premiere and sat, with a fixed scowl, inside a small roped area. There was
nothing about him to indicate that he was alive except an occasional movement in
his milky gray eyes, but once when a bold child touched his sword, his arm shot
forward and slapped the hand off in an instant. In the spring when the old homes
were opened for pilgrimages, he was invited to wear his uniform and sit in some
conspicuous spot and lend atmosphere to the scene. Some of these times he only
snarled at the visitors but sometimes he told about the premiere and the beautiful
girls.
If he had died before Sally Poker’s graduation, she thought she would have
died herself. At the beginning of the summer term, even before she knew if she
would pass, she told the Dean that her grandfather, General Tennessee Flintrock
Sash of the Confederacy, would attend her graduation and that he was a hundred
and four years old and that his mind was still clear as a bell. Distinguished
visitors were always welcome and could sit on the stage and be introduced. She
made arrangements with her nephew, John Wesley Poker Sash, a Boy Scout, to
come wheel the General’s chair. She thought how sweet it would be to see the old
man in his courageous gray and the young boy in his clean khaki—the old and the
new, she thought appropriately—they would be behind her on the stage when she
received her degree.
Everything went almost exactly as she had planned. In the summer while she
was away at school, the General stayed with other relatives and they brought him
and John Wesley, the Boy Scout, down to the graduation. A reporter came to the
hotel where they stayed and took the General’s picture with Sally Poker on one
side of him and John Wesley on the other. The General, who had had his picture
taken with beautiful girls, didn’t think much of this. He had forgotten precisely
what kind of event this was he was going to attend but he remembered that he was
to wear his uniformand carry the sword.
On the morning of the graduation, Sally Poker had to line up in the academic
procession with the B.S.’s in Elementary Education and she couldn’t see to getting
him on the stage herself—but John Wesley, a fat blond boy of ten with an
executive expression, guaranteed to take care of everything. She came in her
academic gown to the hotel and dressed the old man in his uniform. He was as
frail as a dried spider. “Aren’t you just thrilled, Papa?” she asked. “I’m just
thrilled to death!”
“Put the soward acrost my lap, damm you,” the old man said, “where it’ll
shine.”
She put it there and then stood back looking at him. “You look just grand,” she
said.
“God damm it,” the old man said in a slow monotonous certain tone as if he
were saying it to the beating of his heart. “God dammevery goddamthing to hell.”
“Now, now,” she said and left happily to join the procession.
The graduates were lined up behind the Science building and she found her
place just as the line started to move. She had not slept much the night before and
when she had, she had dreamed of the exercises, murmuring, “See him, see him?”
in her sleep but waking up every time just before she turned her head to look at
him behind her. The graduates had to walk three blocks in the hot sun in their
black wool robes and as she plodded stolidly along she thought that if anyone
considered this academic procession something impressive to behold, they need
only wait until they saw that old General in his courageous gray and that clean
young Boy Scout stoutly wheeling his chair across the stage with the sunlight
catching the sword. She imagined that John Wesley had the old man ready now
behind the stage.
The black procession wound its way up the two blocks and started on the main
walk leading to the auditorium. The visitors stood on the grass, picking out their
graduates. Men were pushing back their hats and wiping their foreheads and
women were lifting their dresses slightly from the shoulders to keep them from
sticking to their backs. The graduates in their heavy robes looked as if the last
beads of ignorance were being sweated out of them. The sun blazed off the fenders
of automobiles and beat from the columns of the buildings and pulled the eye from
one spot of glare to another. It pulled Sally Poker’s toward the big red Coca-Cola
machine that had been set up by the side of the auditorium. Here she saw the
General parked, scowling and hatless in his chair in the blazing sun while John
Wesley, his blouse loose behind, his hip and cheek pressed to the red machine,
was drinking a Coca-Cola. She broke from the line and galloped to them and
snatched the bottle away. She shook the boy and thrust in his blouse and put the hat
on the old man’s head. “Now get him in there!” she said, pointing one rigid finger
to the side door of the building.
For his part the General felt as if there were a little hole beginning to widen in
the top of his head. The boy wheeled him rapidly down a walk and up a ramp and
into a building and bumped him over the stage entrance and into position where he
had been told and the General glared in front of him at heads that all seemed to
flow together and eyes that moved from one face to another. Several figures in
black robes came and picked up his hand and shook it. A black procession was
flowing up each aisle and forming to stately music in a pool in front of him. The
music seemed to be entering his head through the little hole and he thought for a
second that the procession would try to enter it too.
He didn’t know what procession this was but there was something familiar
about it. It must be familiar to himsince it had come to meet him, but he didn’t like
a black procession. Any procession that came to meet him, he thought irritably,
ought to have floats with beautiful guls on themlike the floats before the preemy. It
must be something connected with history like they were always having. He had
no use for any of it. What happened then wasn’t anything to a man living now and
he was living now.
When all the procession had flowed into the black pool, a black figure began
orating in front of it. The figure was telling something about history and the
General made up his mind he wouldn’t listen, but the words kept seeping in
through the little hole in his head. He heard his own name mentioned and his chair
was shuttled forward roughly and the Boy Scout took a big bow. They called his
name and the fat brat bowed. Goddam you, the old man tried to say, get out of my
way, I can stand up!—but he was jerked back again before he could get up and
take the bow. He supposed the noise they made was for him. If he was over, he
didn’t intend to listen to any more of it. If it hadn’t been for the little hole in the
top of his head, none of the words would have got to him. He thought of putting his
finger up there into the hole to block them but the hole was a little wider than his
finger and it felt as if it were getting deeper.
Another black robe had taken the place of the first one and was talking now
and he heard his name mentioned again but they were not talking about him, they
were still talking about history. “If we forget our past,” the speaker was saying,
“we won’t remember our future and it will be as well for we won’t have one.”
The General heard some of these words gradually. He had forgotten history and he
didn’t intend to remember it again. He had forgotten the name and face of his wife
and the names and faces of his children or even if he had a wife and children, and
he had forgotten the names of places and the places themselves and what had
happened at them.
He was considerably irked by the hole in his head. He had not expected to
have a hole in his head at this event. It was the slow black music that had put it
there and though most of the music had stopped outside, there was still a little of it
in the hole, going deeper and moving around in his thoughts, letting the words he
heard into the dark places of his brain. He heard the words, Chickamauga, Shiloh,
Johnston, Lee, and he knew he was inspiring all these words that meant nothing to
him. He wondered if he had been a general at Chickamauga or at Lee. Then he
tried to see himself and the horse mounted in the middle of a float full of beautiful
girls, being driven slowly through downtown Atlanta. Instead, the old words
began to stir in his head as if they were trying to wrench themselves out of place
and come to life.
The speaker was through with that war and had gone on to the next one and
now he was approaching another and all his words, like the black procession,
were vaguely familiar and irritating. There was a long finger of music in the
General’s head, probing various spots that were words, letting in a little light on
the words and helping them to live. The words began to come toward him and he
said, Dammit! I ain’t going to have it! and he started edging backwards to get out
of the way. Then he saw the figure in the black robe sit down and there was a
noise and the black pool in front of him began to rumble and to flow toward him
from either side to the black slow music, and he said, Stop dammit! I can’t do but
one thing at a time! He couldn’t protect himself from the words and attend to the
procession too and the words were coming at him fast. He felt that he was running
backwards and the words were coming at him like musket fire, just escaping him
but getting nearer and nearer. He turned around and began to run as fast as he
could but he found himself running toward the words. He was running into a
regular volley of them and meeting them with quick curses. As the music swelled
toward him, the entire past opened up on him out of nowhere and he felt his body
riddled in a hundred places with sharp stabs of pain and he fell down, returning a
curse for every hit. He saw his wife’s narrow face looking at him critically
through her round gold-rimmed glasses; he saw one of his squinting bald-headed
sons; and his mother ran toward him with an anxious look; then a succession of
places—Chickamauga, Shiloh, Marthasville—rushed at himas if the past were the
only future now and he had to endure it. Then suddenly he saw that the black
procession was almost on him. He recognized it, for it had been dogging all his
days. He made such a desperate effort to see over it and find out what comes after
the past that his hand clenched the sword until the blade touched bone.
The graduates were crossing the stage in a long file to receive their scrolls and
shake the president’s hand. As Sally Poker, who was near the end, crossed, she
glanced at the General and saw him sitting fixed and fierce, his eyes wide open,
and she turned her head forward again and held it a perceptible degree higher and
received her scroll. Once it was all over and she was out of the auditorium in the
sun again, she located her kin and they waited together on a bench in the shade for
John Wesley to wheel the old man out. That crafty scout had bumped him out the
back way and rolled him at high speed down a flagstone path and was waiting
now, with the corpse, in the long line at the Coca-Cola machine.