IN his dream he was shutting the front door with its strawberry windows and lemon windows and
windows like white clouds and windows like clear water in a country stream. Two dozen panes squared round
the one big pane, coloured of fruit wines and gelatins and cool water-ices. He remembered his father holding
him up as a child. 'Look!' And through the green glass the world was emerald, moss, and summer mint. 'Look!'
The lilac pane made Concord grapes of all the passers by. And at last the strawberry glass perpetually bathed
the town in roseate warmth, carpeted the world in pink sunrise, and made the cut lawn seem imported from
some Persian rug bazaar. The strawberry window, best of all, cured people of their paleness, warmed the cold
rain, and set the blowing, shifting February snows afire.
'Ah!'
He awoke.
He heard his boys talking before he was fully out of his dream and he lay in the dark now, listening to the
sad sound their talk made, like the wind blowing the white sea-bottoms in the blue hills; and then he
remembered. We're on Mars, he thought.
'What?' His wife cried out in her sleep.
He hadn't realized he had spoken; he lay as still as he possibly could. But now, with a strange kind of
numb reality he saw his wife rise to haunt the room, her pale face staring through the small, high windows of
their quonset hut at the clear but unfamiliar stars.
'Carrie,' he whispered.
She did not hear.
'Carrie,' he whispered. 'There's something I want to tell you. For a month now I've been wanting to say . . .
tomorrow . . . tomorrow morning, there's going to be . . . '
But his wife sat all to herself in the blue starlight and would not look at him.
He closed his eyes tight.
If only the sun stayed up, he thought, if only there was no night. For during the day, he nailed the
settlement town together, the boys were in school, and Carrie had cleaning, gardening, cooking to do. But when
the sun was gone and their hands were empty of flowers or hammers and nails and arithmetics, their memories,
like night birds, came home in the dark. You heard them rustle the black roof like the first rain of a new season
of endless rains. You woke to the cool pattering, which was not rain, but only the slow dipping down, the
flicking, brushing, touching, the whispered flight and glide of remembering towards dawn.
His wife moved, a slight turn of her head.
'Will,' she said at last, 'I want to go home.'
'Carrie!'
'This isn't home,' she said.
He saw that her eyes were wet and brimming. 'Carrie, hold on awhile.'
'I've got no fingernails from holding on now!'
As if she still moved in her sleep, she opened her bureau drawers and took out layers of handkerchiefs,
shirts, underclothing and put it all on top of the bureau, not seeing it, letting her fingers touch and bring it out
and put it down. The routine was long familiar now. She would talk and put things out and stand quietly awhile,
and then later put all the things away and come, dry-faced, back to bed and dreams. He was afraid that some
night she would empty every drawer, and reach for the few ancient suitcases against the wall.
'Will . . . ' Her voice was not bitter, but soft, featureless, and as uncoloured as the moonlight that showed
what she was doing. 'So many nights for six months I've talked this way; I'm ashamed. You work hard building
houses in town. A man who works so hard shouldn't have to listen to a wife gone sad on him. But there's
nothing to do but talk it out. It's the little things I miss most of all. I don't know — silly things. Our front porch
swing. The wicker rocking-chair, summer nights. Looking at the people walk or ride by those evenings, back in
Ohio. Our black upright piano, out of tune. My Swedish cut glass. Our parlour furniture — oh, it was like a
herd of elephants, I know, and all of it old. And the Chinese hanging crystals that hit when the wind blew. And
talking to neighbours there on the front porch, July nights. All those crazy, silly things . . . they're not
important. But it seems those are things that come to mind around three in the morning. I'm sorry.'
'Don't be,' he said. 'Mars is a far place. It smells funny, looks funny, and feels funny. I think to myself
nights, too. We came from a nice town.'
'It was green,' she said. 'In the spring and summer. And yellow and red in the fall. And ours was a nice
house; my, it was old, eighty-ninety years or so. Used to hear the house talking at night, whispering away. All
the dry wood, the banisters, the front porch, the sills. Wherever you touched, it talked to you. Every room a
different way. And when you had the whole house talking, it was a family around you in the dark, putting you
to sleep. No other house, the kind they build nowadays, can be the same. A lot of people have got to go through
and live in a house to make it mellow down all over. This place here, now, this hut, it doesn't know I'm in it,
doesn't care if I live or die. It makes a noise like tin, and tin's cold. It's got no pores for the years to sink in. It's
got no cellar for you to put things away for next year and the year after that. It's got no attic where you keep
things from last year and all the other years before you were born; and without an attic, you've got no past. If
we only had a little bit up here that was familiar, Will, then we could make room for all that's strange. But when
everything, every single thing is strange, then it takes forever to make things familiar.'
He nodded in the dark. 'There's nothing you say that I haven't thought.'
She was looking at the moonlight where it lay upon the suitcases against the wall. He saw her move her
hand down towards them.
'Carrie!'
'What?'
He swung his legs out of bed. 'Carrie, I've done a crazy dam-fool thing. All these months I heard you
dreaming away, scared, and the boys at night and the wind, and Mars out there, the sea-bottoms and all, and . . .
' He stopped and swallowed. 'You got to understand what I did and why I did it. All the money we had in the
bank a month ago, all the money we saved for ten years, I spent.'
'Will!'
'I threw it away, Carrie, I swear, I threw it away on nothing. It was going to be a surprise. But now,
tonight, there you are, and there are those damned suitcases on the floor and . . . '
'Will,' she said, turning around. 'You mean we've gone through all this, on Mars, putting away extra
money every week, only to have you burn it up in a few hours?'
'I don't know,' he said. 'I'm a crazy fool. Look, it's not long till morning. We'll get up early. I'll take you
down to see what I've done. I don't want to tell you, I want you to see. And if it's no go, then, well, there's
always those suitcases and the rocket to Earth four times a week.'
She did not move. 'Will, Will,' she murmured.
'Don't say any more,' he said.
'Will, Will . . . ' She shook her head slowly, unbelievingly. He turned away and lay back down on his own
side of the bed, and she sat on the other side, and for a moment did not lie down, but only sat looking at the
bureau where her handkerchiefs and jewellery and clothing lay ready in neat stacks where she had left them.
Outside a wind the colour of moonlight stirred up the sleeping dust and powdered the air.
At last she lay back, but said nothing more and was a cold weight in the bed, staring down the long tunnel
of night towards the faintest sign of morning.
They got up in the very first light and moved in the small quonset hut without a sound. It was a pantomime
prolonged almost to the time when someone might scream at the silence, as the mother and father and the boys
washed and dressed and ate a quiet breakfast of toast and fruit-juice and coffee, with no one looking directly at
anyone and everyone watching someone in the reflective surfaces of toaster, glassware, or cutlery, where all
their faces were melted out of shape and made terribly alien in the early hour. Then, at last, they opened the
quonset door and let in the air that blew across the cold blue-white Martian seas, where only the sand tides
dissolved and shifted and made ghost patterns, and they stepped out under a raw and staring cold sky and began
their walk towards a town, which seemed no more than a motion-picture set far on ahead of them on a vast,
empty stage.
'What part of town are we going to?' asked Carrie.
'The rocket depot,' he said. 'But before we get there, I've a lot to say.'
The boys slowed down and moved behind their parents, listening. The father gazed ahead, and not once in
all the time he was talking did he look at his wife or sons to see how they were taking all that he said.
'I believe in Mars,' he began, quietly. 'I guess I believe some day it'll belong to us. We'll nail it down. We'll
settle in. We won't turn tail and run. It came to me one day a year ago, right after we first arrived. Why did we
come? I asked myself. Because, I said, because. It's the same thing with the salmon every year. The salmon
don't know why they go where they go, but they go, anyway. Up rivers they don't remember, up streams,
jumping waterfalls, but finally making it to where they propagate and die, and the whole thing starts again. Call
it racial memory, instinct, call it nothing, but there it is. And here we are.'
They walked in the silent morning with the great sky watching them and the strange blue and steam-white
sands sifting about their feet on the new highway.
'So here we are. And from Mars where? Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, and on out? Right. And on out. Why?
Some day the sun will blow up like a leaky furnace. Boom — there goes Earth. But maybe Mars won't be hurt;
or if Mars is hurt maybe Pluto won't be, or if Pluto's hurt, then where'll we be, our sons' sons, that is?'
He gazed steadily up into that flawless shell of plum-coloured sky.
'Why, we'll be on some world with a number maybe; planet 6 of star system 97, planet 2 of system 99! So
damn far off from here you need a nightmare to take it in! We'll be gone, do you see, gone off away and safe!
And I thought to myself, ah, ah. So that's the reason we came to Mars, so that's the reason men shoot off their
rockets.'
'Will— '
'Let me finish. Not to make money, no. Not to see the sights, no. Those are the lies men tell, the fancy
reasons they give themselves. Get rich, get famous, they say. Have fun, jump around, they say. But all the
while, inside, something else is ticking along the way it ticks in salmon or whales, the way it ticks, by God, in
the smallest microbe you want to name. And that little clock that ticks in everything living, you know what it
says? It says get away, spread out, move along, keep swimming. Run to so many worlds and build so many
towns that nothing can ever kill man. You see, Carrie? It's not just us come to Mars, it's the race, the whole darn
human race, depending on how we make out in our lifetime. This thing is so big I want to laugh, I'm so scared
stiff of it.'
He felt the boys walking steadily behind him and he felt Carrie beside him and he wanted to see her face
and how she was taking all this, but he didn't look there, either.
'All this is no different than me and Dad walking the fields when I was a boy, casting seed by hand when
our seeder broke down and we'd no money to fix it. It had to be done somehow, for the later crops. My God,
Carrie, my God, you remember those Sunday-supplement articles, THE EARTH WILL FREEZE IN A
MILLION YEARS! I bawled once, as a boy, reading articles like that. My mother asked why. I'm bawling for
all those poor people up ahead, I said. Don't worry about them, mother said. But, Carrie, that's my whole point;
we are worrying about them. Or we wouldn't be here. It matters if Man with a capital M keeps going. There's
nothing better than Man with a capital M in my books. I'm prejudiced, of course, because I'm one of the breed.
But if there's any way to get hold of that immortality men are always talking about, this is the way — spread
out — seed the universe. Then you got a harvest against crop failures anywhere down the line. No matter if
Earth has famines or the rust comes in. You got the new wheat lifting on Pluto or where-in-hell-ever man gets
to in the next thousand years. I'm crazy with the idea, Carrie, crazy. When I finally hit on it I got so excited I
wanted to grab people, you, the boys, and tell them. But hell, I knew that wasn't necessary. I knew a day or
night would come when you'd hear that ticking in yourselves, too, and then you'd see, and no one'd have to say
anything again about all this. It's big talk, Carrie, I know, and big thoughts for a man short of five feet five, but
by all that's holy, it's true.'
They moved through the deserted streets of the town and listened to the echoes of their walking feet.
'And this morning?' said Carrie.
'I'm coming to this morning,' he said. 'Part of me wants to go home, too. But the other part says if we go,
everything's lost. So I thought, what bothers us most? Some of the things we once had. Some of the boys'
things, your things, mine. And I thought, if it takes an old thing to get a new thing started, by God, I'll use the
old thing. I remember from history books that a thousand years ago they put charcoals in a hollowed-out cowhorn, blew on them during the day, so they carried their fire on marches from place to place, to start a fire every
night from the sparks left over from morning. Always a new fire, but always something of the old in it. So I
weighed and balanced it off. Is the Old worth all our money? I asked. No! It's only the things we did with the
Old that have any worth. Well, then, is the New worth all our money? I asked. Do you feel like investing in the
day after the middle of next week? Yes! I said. If I can fight this thing that makes us want to go back to Earth,
I'd dip my money in kerosene and strike a match!'
Carrie and the two boys did not move. They stood on the street, looking at him as if he were a storm that
had passed over and around, almost blowing them from the ground, a storm that was now dying away.
'The freight rocket came in this morning,' he said, quietly. 'Our delivery's on it. Let's go and pick it up.'
They walked slowly up the three steps into the rocket depot and across the echoing floor towards the
freight room that was just sliding back its doors, opening for the day.
'Tell us again about the salmon,' said one of the boys.
In the middle of the warm morning they drove out of town in a rented truck filled with great crates and
boxes and parcels and packages, long ones, tall ones, short ones, flat ones, all numbered and neatly addressed to
one William Prentiss, New Toledo, Mars.
'Will,' said Carrie, over and over again. 'Will.'
They stopped the truck by the quonset hut and the boys jumped down and helped their mother out. For a
moment Will sat behind the wheel, and then slowly got out himself, to walk around and look into the back of
the truck at the crates.
And by noon all but one of the boxes were opened and their contents placed on the sea-bottom where the
family stood among them.
'Carrie . . . '
And he led her up the old porch steps that now stood uncrated on the edge of town.
'Listen to 'em, Carrie.'
The steps squeaked and whispered underfoot.
'What do they say, tell me what they say?'
She stood on the ancient wooden steps, holding to herself, and could not tell him.
He waved his hand. 'Front porch here, living-room there, dining-room, kitchen, three bedrooms. Part we'll
build new, part we'll bring. Of course all we got here now is the front porch, some parlour furniture and the old
bed.'
'All that money, Will!'
He turned, smiling. 'You're not mad, now, look at me! You're not mad. We'll bring it all up, next month,
next year. The cut-glass vases, that Armenian carpet your mother gave us in 1961! Just let the sun explode!'
They looked at the other crates, numbered and lettered: Front-porch swing, front-porch wicker rocker,
hanging Chinese crystals . . .
'I'll blow them myself to make them ring.'
They set the front door on the top of the stairs, with its little panes of coloured glass, and Carrie looked
through the strawberry window.
'What do you see?'
But he knew what she saw, for he gazed through the coloured glass, too. And there was Mars, with its cold
sky warmed and its dead seas fired with colour, with its hills like mounds of strawberry ice, and its sand like
burning charcoals sifted by wind. The strawberry window, the strawberry window, breathed soft rose colours
on the land and filled the mind and the eye with the light of a never-ending dawn. Bent there, looking through,
he heard himself say:
'The town'll be out this way in a year. This'll be a shade street, you'll have your porch, and you'll have
friends. You won't need all this much, then. But starting right here, with this little bit that's familiar, watch it
spread, watch Mars change so you'll know it as if you'd known it all your life.'
He ran down the steps to the last and as-yet unopened canvas-covered crate. With his pocket knife he cut a
hole in the canvas. 'Guess!' he said.
'My kitchen stove? My furnace?'
'Not in a million years.' He smiled very gently. 'Sing me a song,' he said.
'Will, you're clean off your head.'
'Sing me a song worth all the money we had in the bank and now don't have, but who gives a blast in hell,'
he said.
'I don't know anything but “Genevieve, Sweet Genevieve”!'
'Sing that,' he said.
But she could not open her mouth and start the song. He saw her lips move and try, but there was no
sound.
He ripped the canvas wider and shoved his hand into the crate and touched around for a quiet moment, and
started to sing the words himself until he moved his hand a last time and then a single clear piano chord sprang
out on the morning air.
'There,' he said. 'Let's take it right on to the end. Everyone! Here's the harmony.'