MISS WILLERTON always crumbed the table. It was her particular household
accomplishment and she did it with great thoroughness. Lucia and Bertha did the
dishes and Garner went into the parlor and did the Morning Press crossword
puzzle. That left Miss Willerton in the dining room by herself and that was all
right with Miss Willerton. Whew! Breakfast in that house was always an ordeal.
Lucia insisted that they have a regular hour for breakfast just like they did for
other meals. Lucia said a regular breakfast made for other regular habits, and with
Garner’s tendency to upsets, it was imperative that they establish some system in
their eating. This way she could also see that he put the Agar-Agar on his Cream
of Wheat. As if, Miss Willerton thought, after having done it for fifty years, he’d
be capable of doing anything else. The breakfast dispute always started with
Garner’s Cream of Wheat and ended with her three spoonfuls of pineapple crush.
“You know your acid, Willie,” Miss Lucia would always say, “you know your
acid”; and then Garner would roll his eyes and make some sickening remark and
Bertha would jump and Lucia would look distressed and Miss Willerton would
taste the pineapple crush she had already swallowed.
It was a relief to crumb the table. Crumbing the table gave one time to think,
and if Miss Willerton were going to write a story, she had to think about it first.
She could usually think best sitting in front of her typewriter, but this would do for
the time being. First, she had to think of a subject to write a story about. There
were so many subjects to write stories about that Miss Willerton never could think
of one. That was always the hardest part of writing a story, she always said. She
spent more time thinking of something to write about than she did writing.
Sometimes she discarded subject after subject and it usually took her a week or
two to decide finally on something. Miss Willerton got out the silver crumber and
the crumb-catcher and started stroking the table. I wonder, she mused, if a baker
would make a good subject? Foreign bakers were very picturesque, she thought.
Aunt Myrtile Filmer had left her four color-tints of French bakers in mushroom-
looking hats. They were great tall fellows—blond and.…
“Willie!” Miss Lucia screamed, entering the dining room with the saltcellars.
“For heaven’s sake, hold the catcher under the crumber or you’ll have those
crumbs on the rug. I’ve Bisseled it four times in the last week and I am not going
to do it again.”
“You have not Bisseled it on account of any crumbs I have spilled,” Miss
Willerton said tersely. “I always pick up the crumbs I drop,” and she added, “I
drop relatively few.”
“And wash the crumber before you put it up this time,” Miss Lucia returned.
Miss Willerton drained the crumbs into her hand and threw them out the
window. She took the catcher and crumber to the kitchen and ran them under the
cold-water faucet. She dried them and stuck them back in the drawer. That was
over. Now she could get to the typewriter. She could stay there until dinnertime.
Miss Willerton sat down at her typewriter and let out her breath. Now! What
had she been thinking about? Oh. Bakers. Hmmm. Bakers. No, bakers wouldn’t
do. Hardly colorful enough. No social tension connected with bakers. Miss
Willerton sat staring through her typewriter. A S D F G—her eyes wandered over
the keys. Hmmm. Teachers? Miss Willerton wondered. No. Heavens no. Teachers
always made Miss Willerton feel peculiar. Her teachers at Willowpool Seminary
had been all right but they were women. Willowpool Female Seminary, Miss
Willerton remembered. She didn’t like the phrase, Willowpool Female Seminary
—it sounded biological. She always just said she was a graduate of Willowpool.
Men teachers made Miss Willerton feel as if she were going to mispronounce
something. Teachers weren’t timely anyhow. They weren’t even a social problem.
Social problem. Social problem. Hmmm. Sharecroppers! Miss Willerton had
never been intimately connected with sharecroppers but, she reflected, they would
make as arty a subject as any, and they would give her that air of social concern
which was so valuable to have in the circles she was hoping to travel! “I can
always capitalize,” she muttered, “on the hookworm.” It was coming to her now!
Certainly! Her fingers plinked excitedly over the keys, never touching them. Then
suddenly she began typing at great speed.
“Lot Motun,” the typewriter registered, “called his dog.” “Dog” was followed
by an abrupt pause. Miss Willerton always did her best work on the first sentence.
“First sentences,” she always said, “came to her—like a flash! Just like a flash!”
she would say and snap her fingers, “like a flash!” And she built her story up from
them. “Lot Motun called his dog” had been automatic with Miss Willerton, and
reading the sentence over, she decided that not only was “Lot Motun” a good name
for a sharecropper, but also that having him call his dog was an excellent thing to
have a sharecropper do. “The dog pricked up its ears and slunk over to Lot.” Miss
Willerton had the sentence down before she realized her error—two “Lots” in one
paragraph. That was displeasing to the ear. The typewriter grated back and Miss
Willerton applied three x’s to “Lot.” Over it she wrote in pencil, “him.” Now she
was ready to go again. “Lot Motun called his dog. The dog pricked up its ears and
slunk over to him.” Two dogs, too, Miss Willerton thought. Ummm. But that didn’t
affect the ears like two “Lots,” she decided.
Miss Willerton was a great believer in what she called “phonetic art.” She
maintained that the ear was as much a reader as the eye. She liked to express it
that way. “The eye forms a picture,” she had told a group at the United Daughters
of the Colonies, “that can be painted in the abstract, and the success of a literary
venture” (Miss Willerton liked the phrase, ‘literary venture’) “depends on the
abstract created in the mind and the tonal quality” (Miss Willerton also liked
‘tonal quality’) “registered in the ear.” There was something biting and sharp
about “Lot Motun called his dog”; followed by “the dog pricked up its ears and
slunk over to him,” it gave the paragraph just the send-off it needed.
“He pulled the animal’s short, scraggy ears and rolled over with it in the
mud.” Perhaps, Miss Willerton mused, that would be overdoing it. But a
sharecropper, she knew, might reasonably be expected to roll over in the mud.
Once she had read a novel dealing with that kind of people in which they had done
just as bad and, throughout three-fourths of the narrative, much worse. Lucia found
it in cleaning out one of Miss Willerton’s bureau drawers and after glancing at a
few randompages took it between thumb and index finger to the furnace and threw
it in. “When I was cleaning your bureau out this morning, Willie, I found a book
that Garner must have put there for a joke,” Miss Lucia told her later. “It was
awful, but you know how Garner is. I burned it.” And then, tittering, she added, “I
was sure it couldn’t be yours.” Miss Willerton was sure it could be none other’s
than hers but she hesitated in claiming the distinction. She had ordered it from the
publisher because she didn’t want to ask for it at the library. It had cost her $3.75
with the postage and she had not finished the last four chapters. At least, she had
got enough from it, though, to be able to say that Lot Motun might reasonably roll
over in the mud with his dog. Having him do that would give more point to the
hookworm, too, she decided. “Lot Motun called his dog. The dog pricked up its
ears and slunk over to him. He pulled the animal’s short, scraggy ears and rolled
over with it in the mud.”
Miss Willerton settled back. That was a good beginning. Now she would plan
her action. There had to be a woman, of course. Perhaps Lot could kill her. That
type of woman always started trouble. She might even goad him on to kill her
because of her wantonness and then he would be pursued by his conscience
maybe.
He would have to have principles if that were going to be the case, but it
would be fairly easy to give him those. Now how was she going to work that in
with all the love interest there’d have to be, she wondered. There would have to
be some quite violent, naturalistic scenes, the sadistic sort of thing one read of in
connection with that class. It was a problem. However, Miss Willerton enjoyed
such problems. She liked to plan passionate scenes best of all, but when she came
to write them, she always began to feel peculiar and to wonder what the family
would say when they read them. Garner would snap his fingers and wink at her at
every opportunity; Bertha would think she was terrible; and Lucia would say in
that silly voice of hers, “What have you been keeping from us, Willie? What have
you been keeping from us?” and titter like she always did. But Miss Willerton
couldn’t think about that now; she had to plan her characters.
Lot would be tall, stooped, and shaggy but with sad eyes that made him look
like a gentleman in spite of his red neck and big fumbling hands. He’d have
straight teeth and, to indicate that he had some spirit, red hair. His clothes would
hang on him but he’d wear them nonchalantly like they were part of his skin;
maybe, she mused, he’d better not roll over with the dog after all. The woman
would be more or less pretty—yellow hair, fat ankles, muddy-colored eyes.
She would get supper for him in the cabin and he’d sit there eating the lumpy
grits she hadn’t bothered to put salt in and thinking about something big, something
way off—another cow, a painted house, a clean well, a farm of his own even. The
woman would yowl at him for not cutting enough wood for her stove and would
whine about the pain in her back. She’d sit and stare at him eating the sour grits
and say he didn’t have nerve enough to steal food. “You’re just a damn beggar!”
she’d sneer. Then he’d tell her to keep quiet. “Shut your mouth!” he’d shout. “I’ve
taken all I’m gonna.” She’d roll her eyes, mocking him, and laugh—“I ain’t afraid
er nothin’ that looks like you.” Then he’d push his chair behind him and head
toward her. She’d snatch a knife off the table—Miss Willerton wondered what
kind of a fool the woman was—and back away holding it in front of her. He’d
lunge forward but she’d dart from him like a wild horse. Then they’d face each
other again—their eyes brimming with hate—and sway back and forth. Miss
Willerton could hear the seconds dropping on the tin roof outside. He’d dart at her
again but she’d have the knife ready and would plunge it into him in an instant—
Miss Willerton could stand it no longer. She struck the woman a terrific blow on
the head from behind. The knife dropped out of her hands and a mist swept her
from the room. Miss Willerton turned to Lot. “Let me get you some hot grits,” she
said. She went over to the stove and got a clean plate of smooth white grits and a
piece of butter.
“Gee, thanks,” Lot said and smiled at her with his nice teeth. “You always fix
’em just right. You know,” he said, “I been thinkin’—we could get out of this
tenant farm. We could have a decent place. If we made anything this year over, we
could put it in a cow an’ start buildin’ things up. Think what it would mean,
Willie, just think.”
She sat down beside him and put her hand on his shoulder. “We’ll do it,” she
said. “We’ll make better than we’ve made any year and by spring we should have
us that cow.”
“You always know how I feel, Willie,” he said. “You always have known.”
They sat there for a long time thinking of how well they understood each other.
“Finish your food,” she said finally.
After he had eaten, he helped her take the ashes out the stove and then, in the
hot July evening, they walked down the pasture toward the creek and talked about
the place they were going to have some day.
When late March came and the rainy season was almost there, they had
accomplished almost more than was believable. For the past month, Lot had been
up every morning at five, and Willy an hour earlier to get in all the work they
could while the weather was clear. Next week, Lot said, the rain would probably
start and if they didn’t get the crop in by then, they would lose it—and all they had
gained in the past months. They knew what that meant—another year of getting
along with no more than they’d had the last. Then too, there’d be a baby next year
instead of a cow. Lot had wanted the cow anyway. “Children don’t cost all that
much to feed,” he’d argued, “an’ the cow would help feed him,” but Willie had
been firm—the cow could come later—the child must have a good start. “Maybe,”
Lot had said finally, “we’ll have enough for both,” and he had gone out to look at
the new-plowed ground as if he could count the harvest fromthe furrows.
Even with as little as they’d had, it had been a good year. Willie had cleaned
the shack, and Lot had fixed the chimney. There was a profusion of petunias by the
doorstep and a colony of snapdragons under the window. It had been a peaceful
year. But now they were becoming anxious over the crop. They must gather it
before the rain. “We need another week,” Lot muttered when he came in that night.
“One more week an’we can do it. Do you feel like gatherin’? It isn’t right that you
should have to,” he sighed, “but I can’t hire any help.”
“I’mall right,” she said, hiding her trembling hands behind her. “I’ll gather.”
“It’s cloudy tonight,” Lot said darkly.
The next day they worked until nightfall—worked until they could work no
longer and then stumbled back to the cabin and fell into bed.
Willie woke in the night conscious of a pain. It was a soft, green pain with
purple lights running through it. She wondered if she were awake. Her head rolled
fromside to side and there were droning shapes grinding boulders in it.
Lot sat up. “Are you bad off?” he asked, trembling.
She raised herself on her elbow and then sank down again. “Get Anna up by
the creek,” she gasped.
The droning became louder and the shapes grayer. The pain intermingled with
themfor seconds first, then interminably. It came again and again. The sound of the
droning grew more distinct and toward morning she realized that it was rain. Later
she asked hoarsely, “How long has it been raining?”
“Most two days, now,” Lot answered.
“Then we lost.” Willie looked listlessly out at the dripping trees. “It’s over.”
“It isn’t over,” he said softly. “We got a daughter.”
“You wanted a son.”
“No, I got what I wanted—two Willies instead of one—that’s better than a
cow, even,” he grinned. “What can I do to deserve all I got, Willie?” He bent over
and kissed her forehead.
“What can I?” she asked slowly. “And what can I do to help you more?”
“How about your going to the grocery, Willie?”
Miss Willerton shoved Lot away from her. “W-what did you say, Lucia?” she
stuttered.
“I said how about your going to the grocery this time? I’ve been every morning
this week and I’mbusy now.”
Miss Willerton pushed back from the typewriter. “Very well,” she said
sharply. “What do you want there?”
“A dozen eggs and two pounds of tomatoes—ripe tomatoes—and you’d better
start doctoring that cold right now. Your eyes are already watering and you’re
hoarse. There’s Empirin in the bathroom. Write a check on the house for the
groceries. And wear your coat. It’s cold.”
Miss Willerton rolled her eyes upward. “I am forty-four years old,” she
announced, “and able to take care of myself.”
“And get ripe tomatoes,” Miss Lucia returned.
Miss Willerton, her coat buttoned unevenly, tramped up Broad Street and into
the supermarket. “What was it now?” she muttered. “Two dozen eggs and a pound
of tomatoes, yes.” She passed the lines of canned vegetables and the crackers and
headed for the box where the eggs were kept. But there were no eggs. “Where are
the eggs?” she asked a boy weighing snapbeans.
“We ain’t got nothin’ but pullet eggs,” he said, fishing up another handful of
beans.
“Well, where are they and what is the difference?” Miss Willerton demanded.
He threw several beans back into the bin, slouched over to the egg box and
handed her a carton. “There ain’t no difference really,” he said, pushing his gum
over his front teeth. “A teen-age chicken or somethin’, I don’t know. You want
’em?”
“Yes, and two pounds of tomatoes. Ripe tomatoes,” Miss Willerton added.
She did not like to do the shopping. There was no reason those clerks should be so
condescending. That boy wouldn’t have dawdled with Lucia. She paid for the
eggs and tomatoes and left hurriedly. The place depressed her somehow.
Silly that a grocery should depress one—nothing in it but trifling domestic
doings—women buying beans—riding children in those grocery go-carts—
higgling about an eighth of a pound more or less of squash—what did they get out
of it? Miss Willerton wondered. Where was there any chance for self-expression,
for creation, for art? All around her it was the same—sidewalks full of people
scurrying about with their hands full of little packages and their minds full of little
packages—that woman there with the child on the leash, pulling him, jerking him,
dragging him away from a window with a jack-o’-lantern in it; she would
probably be pulling and jerking him the rest of her life. And there was another,
dropping a shopping bag all over the street, and another wiping a child’s nose,
and up the street an old woman was coming with three grandchildren jumping all
over her, and behind themwas a couple walking too close for refinement.
Miss Willerton looked at the couple sharply as they came nearer and passed.
The woman was plump with yellow hair and fat ankles and muddy-colored eyes.
She had on high-heel pumps and blue anklets, a too-short cotton dress, and a plaid
jacket. Her skin was mottled and her neck thrust forward as if she were sticking it
out to smell something that was always being drawn away. Her face was set in an
inane grin. The man was long and wasted and shaggy. His shoulders were stooped
and there were yellow knots along the side of his large, red neck. His hands
fumbled stupidly with the girl’s as they slumped along, and once or twice he
smiled sickly at her and Miss Willerton could see that he had straight teeth and
sad eyes and a rash over his forehead.
“Ugh,” she shuddered.
Miss Willerton laid the groceries on the kitchen table and went back to her
typewriter. She looked at the paper in it. “Lot Motun called his dog,” it read. “The
dog pricked up its ears and slunk over to him. He pulled the animal’s short,
scraggy ears and rolled over with it in the mud.”
“That sounds awful!” Miss Willerton muttered. “It’s not a good subject
anyway,” she decided. She needed something more colorful—more arty. Miss
Willerton looked at her typewriter for a long time. Then of a sudden her fist hit the
desk in several ecstatic little bounces. “The Irish!” she squealed. “The Irish!”
Miss Willerton had always admired the Irish. Their brogue, she thought, was full
of music; and their history—splendid! And the people, she mused, the Irish
people! They were full of spirit—red-haired, with broad shoulders and great,
drooping mustaches.