THE PEACOCK was following Mrs. Shortley up the road to the hill
where she meant to stand. Moving one behind the other, they looked like
a complete procession. Her arms were folded and as she mounted the
prominence, she might have been the giant wife of the countryside, come
out at some sign of danger to see what the trouble was. She stood on two
tremendous legs, with the grand self-confidence of a mountain, and rose,
up narrowing bulges of granite, to two icy blue points of light that pierced
forward, surveying everything. She ignored the white afternoon sun
which was creeping behind a ragged wall of cloud as if it pretended to be
an intruder and cast her gaze down the red clay road that turned off from
the highway.
 The peacock stopped just behind her, his tail -- glittering green-gold
and blue in the sunlight -- lifted just enough so that it would not touch the
ground. It flowed out on either side like a floating train and his head on
the long blue reed-like neck was drawn back as if his attention were fixed
in the distance on something no one else could see. 
 Mrs. Shortley was watching a black car turn through the gate from the
highway. Over by the toolshed, about fifteen feet away, the two Negroes,
Astor and Sulk, had stopped work to watch. They were hidden by a
mulberry tree but Mrs. Shortley knew they were there.
 Mrs. McIntyre was coming down the steps of her house to meet the
car. She had on her largest smile but Mrs. Shortley, even from her
distance, could detect a nervous slide in it. These people who were
coming were only hired help, like the Shortleys themselves or the
Negroes. Yet here was the owner of the place out to welcome them. Here
she was, wearing her best clothes and a string of beads, and now
bounding forward with her mouth stretched.
 The car stopped at the walk just as she did and the priest was the first
to get out. He was a long-legged black-suited old man with a white hat on
and a collar that he wore backwards, which, Mrs. Shortley knew, was
what priests did who wanted to be known as priests. It was this priest who
had arranged for these people to come here. He opened the back door of
the car and out jumped two children, a boy and a girl, and then, stepping
more slowly, a woman in brown, shaped like a peanut. Then the front
door opened and out stepped the man, the Displaced Person. He was short
and a little sway-backed and wore gold-rimmed spectacles. 
 Mrs. Shortley's vision narrowed on him and then widened to include
the woman and the two children in a group picture. The first thing that
struck her as very peculiar was that they looked like other people. Every
time she had seen them in her imagination, the image she had got was of
the three bears, walking single file, with wooden shoes on like Dutchmen
and sailor hats and bright coats with a lot of buttons. But the woman had
on a dress she might have worn herself and the children were dressed like
anybody from around. The man had on khaki pants and a blue shirt.
Suddenly, as Mrs. McIntyre held out her hand to him, he bobbed down
from the waist and kissed it.
 Mrs. Shortley jerked her own hand up toward her mouth and then
after a second brought it down and rubbed it vigorously on her seat. If Mr.
Shortley had tried to kiss her hand, Mrs. McIntyre would have knocked
him into the middle of next week, but then Mr. Shortley wouldn't have
kissed her hand anyway. He didn't have time to mess around.
 She looked closer, squinting. The boy was in the center of the group,
talking. He was supposed to speak the most English because he had
learned some in Poland and so he was to listen to his father's Polish and
say it in English and then listen to Mrs. McIntyre's English and say that in
Polish. The priest had told Mrs. McIntyre his name was Rudolph and he 
was twelve and the girl's name was Sledgewig and she was nine.
Sledgewig sounded to Mrs. Shortley like something you would name a
bug, or vice versa, as if you named a boy Bollweevil. All of them's last
name was something that only they themselves and the priest could
pronounce. All she could make out of it was Gobblehook. She and Mrs.
McIntyre had been calling them the Gobblehooks all week while they got
ready for them.
 There had been a great deal to do to get ready for them because they
didn't have anything of their own, not a stick of furniture or a sheet or a
dish, and everything had had to be scraped together out of things that Mrs.
McIntyre couldn't use any more herself. They had collected a piece of
odd furniture here and a piece there and they had taken some flowered
chicken feed sacks and made curtains for the windows, two red and one
green, because they had not had enough of the red sacks to go around.
Mrs. McIntyre said she was not made of money and she could not afford
to buy curtains. "They can't talk," Mrs. Shortley said. "You reckon they'll
know what colors even is?" and Mrs. McIntyre had said that after what
those people had been through, they should be grateful for anything they
could get. She said to think how lucky they were to escape from over
there and come to a place like this. 
 Mrs. Shortley recalled a newsreel she had seen once of a small room
piled high with bodies of dead naked people all in a heap, their arms and
legs tangled together, a head thrust in here, a head there, a foot, a knee, a
part that should have been covered up sticking out, a hand raised
clutching nothing. Before you could realize that it was real and take it
into your head, the picture changed and a hollow-sounding voice was
saying, "Time marches on!" This was the kind of thing that was
happening every day in Europe where they had not advanced as in this
country, and watching from her vantage point, Mrs. Shortley had the
sudden intuition that the Gobblehooks, like rats with typhoid fleas, could
have carried all those murderous ways over the water with them directly
to this place. If they had come from where that kind of thing was done to
them, who was to say they were not the kind that would also do it to
others? The width and breadth of this question nearly shook her. Her
stomach trembled as if there had been a slight quake in the heart of the
mountain and automatically she moved down from her elevation and
went forward to be introduced to them, as if she meant to find out at once
what they were capable of.
 She approached, stomach foremost, head back, arms folded, boots
flopping gently against her large legs. About fifteen feet from the 
gesticulating group, she stopped and made her presence felt by training
her gaze on the back of Mrs. McIntyre's neck. Mrs. McIntyre was a small
woman of sixty with a round wrinkled face and red bangs that came
almost down to two high orange-colored penciled eyebrows. She had a
little doll's mouth and eyes that were a soft blue when she opened them
wide but more like steel or granite when she narrowed them to inspect a
milk can. She had buried one husband and divorced two and Mrs.
Shortley respected her as a person nobody had put anything over on yet --
except, ha, ha, perhaps the Shortleys. She held out her arm in Mrs.
Shortley's direction and said to the Rudolph boy, "And this is Mrs.
Shortley. Mr. Shortley is my dairyman. Where's Mr. Shortley?" she asked
as his wife began to approach again, her arms still folded. "I want him to
meet the Guizacs."
 Now it was Guizac. She wasn't calling them Gobblehook to their face.
"Chancey's at the barn," Mrs. Shortley said. "He don't have time to rest
himself in the bushes like them niggers over there."
 Her look first grazed the tops of the displaced people's heads and then
revolved downwards slowly, the way a buzzard glides and drops in the air
until it alights on the carcass. She stood far enough away so that the man
would not be able to kiss her hand. He looked directly at her with little 
green eyes and gave her a broad grin that was toothless on one side. Mrs.
Shortley, without smiling, turned her attention to the little girl who stood
by the mother, swinging her shoulders from side to side. She had long
braided hair in two looped pigtails and there was no denying she was a
pretty child even if she did have a a bug's name. She was better looking
than either Annie Maude or Sarah Mae, Mrs. Shortley's two girls going
on fifteen and seventeen but Annie Maude had never got her growth and
Sarah Mae had a cast in her eye. She compared the foreign boy to her son,
H. C., and H. C. came out far ahead. H. C. was twenty years old with her
build and eye-glasses. He was going to Bible school now and when he
finished he was going to start him a church. He had a strong sweet voice
for hymns and could sell anything. Mrs. Shortley looked at the priest and
was reminded that these people did not have an advanced religion. There
was no telling what all they believed since none of the foolishness had
been reformed out of it. Again she saw the room piled high with bodies.
 The priest spoke in a foreign way himself, English but as if he had a
throatful of hay. He had a big nose and a bald rectangular face and head.
While she was observing him, his large mouth dropped open and with a
stare behind her, he said, "Arrrrrrr!" and pointed.
 Mrs. Shortley spun around. The peacock was standing a few feet 
behind her, with his head slightly cocked.
 "What a beauti-ful birdrrrd!" the priest murmured.
 "Another mouth to feed," Mrs. McIntyre said, glancing in the
peafowl's direction.
 "And when does he raise his splendid tail?" asked the priest.
 "Just when it suits him," she said. "There used to be twenty or thirty
of those things on the place but I've let them die off. I don't like to hear
them scream in the middle of the night."
 "So beauti-ful," the priest said. "A tail full of suns," and he crept
forward on tiptoe and looked down on the bird's back where the polished
gold and green design began. The peacock stood still as if he had just
come down from some sun-drenched height to be a vision for them all.
The priest's homely red face hung over him, glowing with pleasure.
 Mrs. Shortley's mouth had drawn acidly to one side. "Nothing but a
peachicken," she muttered.
 Mrs. McIntyre raised her orange eyebrows and exchanged a look with
her to indicate that the old man was in his second childhood. "Well, we
must show the Guizacs their new home," she said impatiently and she
herded them into the car again. The peacock stepped oft toward the
mulberry tree where the two Negroes were hiding and the priest turned 
his absorbed face away and got in the car and drove the displaced people
down to the shack they were to occupy.
 Mrs. Shortley waited until the car was out of sight and then she made
her way circuitously to the mulberry tree and stood about ten feet behind
the two Negroes, one an old man holding a bucket half full of calf feed
and the other a yellowish boy with a short woodchuck-like head pushed
into a rounded felt hat. "Well," she said slowly, "yawl have looked long
enough. What you think about them?"
 The old man, Astor, raised himself. "We been watching," he said as if
this would be news to her. "Who they now?"
 "They come from over the water," Mrs. Shortley said with a wave of
her arm. "They're what is called Displaced Persons."
 "Displaced Persons," he said. "Well now. I declare. What do that
mean?"
 "It means they ain't where they were born at and there's nowhere for
them to go -- like if you was run out of here and wouldn't nobody have
you."
 "It seem like they here, though," the old man said in a reflective voice.
"If they here, they somewhere."
 "Sho is," the other agreed. "They here." 
 The illogic of Negro-thinking always irked Mrs. Shortley. "They ain't
where they belong to be at," she said. "They belong to be back over
yonder where everything is still like they been used to. Over here it's
more advanced than where they come from. But yawl better look out
now," she said and nodded her head. "There's about ten million billion
more just like them and I know what Mrs. McIntyre said."
 "Say what?" the young one asked.
 "Places are not easy to get nowadays, for white or black, but I reckon
I heard what she stated to me," she said in a sing-song voice.
 "You liable to hear most anything," the old man remarked, leaning
forward as if he were about to walk off but holding himself suspended.
 "I heard her say, 'This is going to put the Fear of the Lord into those
shiftless niggers!'" Mrs. Shortley said in a ringing voice.
 The old man started off. "She say something like that every now and
then," he said. "Ha. Ha. Yes indeed."
 "You better get on in that barn and help Mr. Shortley," she said to the
other one. "What you reckon she pays you for?"
 "He the one sont me out," the Negro muttered. "He the one gimme
something else to do."
 "Well you better get to doing it then," she said and stood there until he 
moved off. Then she stood a while longer, reflecting, her unseeing eyes
directly in front of the peacock's tail. He had jumped into the tree and his
tail hung in front of her, full of fierce planets with eyes that were each
ringed in green and set against a sun that was gold in one second's light
and salmon-colored in the next. She might have been looking at a map of
the universe but she didn't notice it any more than she did the spots of sky
that cracked the dull green of the tree. She was having an inner vision
instead. She was seeing the ten million billion of them pushing their way
into new places over here and herself, a giant angel with wings as wide as
a house, telling the Negroes that they would have to find another place.
She turned herself in the direction of the barn, musing on this, her
expression lofty and satisfied.
 She approached the barn from an oblique angle that allowed her a
look in the door before she could be seen herself. Mr. Chancey Shortley
was adjusting the last milking machine on a large black and white spotted
cow near the entrance, squatting at her heels. There was about a half-inch
of cigarette adhering to the center of his lower lip. Mrs. Shortley observed
it minutely for half a second. "If she seen or heard of you smoking in this
barn, she would blow a fuse," she said.
 Mr. Shortley raised a sharply rutted face containing a washout under 
each cheek and two long crevices eaten down both sides of his blistered
mouth. "You gonter be the one to tell her?" he asked.
 "She's got a nose of her own," Mrs. Shortley said.
 Mr. Shortley, without appearing to give the feat any consideration,
lifted the cigarette stub with the sharp end of his tongue, drew it into his
mouth, closed his lips tightly, rose, stepped out, gave his wife a good
round appreciative stare, and spit the smoldering butt into the grass.
 "Aw Chancey," she said, "haw haw," and she dug a little hole for it
with her toe and covered it up. This trick of Mr. Shortley's was actually
his way of making love to her. When he had done his courting, he had not
brought a guitar to strum or anything pretty for her to keep, but had sat on
her porch steps, not saying a word, imitating a paralyzed man propped up
to enjoy a cigarette. When the cigarette got the proper size, he would turn
his eyes to her and open his mouth and draw in the butt and then sit there
as if he had swallowed it, looking at her with the most loving look
anybody could imagine. It nearly drove her wild and every time he did it,
she wanted to pull his hat down over his eyes and hug him to death.
 "Well," she said, going into the barn after him, "the Gobblehooks
have come and she wants you to meet them, says, 'Where's Mr. Shortley?'
and I says, 'He don't have time 
 "Tote up them weights," Mr. Shortley said, squatting to the cow again.
 "You reckon he can drive a tractor when he don't know English?" she
asked. "I don't think she's going to get her money's worth out of them.
That boy can talk but he looks delicate. The one can work can't talk and
the one can talk can't work. She ain't any better off than if she had more
niggers."
 "I rather have a nigger if it was me," Mr. Shortley said.
 "She says it's ten million more like them, Displaced Persons, she says
that there priest can get her all she wants."
 "She better quit messin with that there priest," Mr. Shortley said.
 "He don't look smart," Mrs. Shortley said, "kind of foolish."
 "I ain't going to have the Pope of Rome tell me how to run no dairy,"
Mr. Shortley said.
 "They ain't Eye-talians, they're Poles," she said. "From Poland where
all them bodies were stacked up at. You remember all them bodies?"
 "I give them three weeks here," Mr. Shortley said.
 Three weeks later Mrs. McIntyre and Mrs. Shortley drove to the cane
bottom to see Mr. Guizac start to operate the silage cutter, a new machine 
that Mrs. McIntyre had just bought because she said, for the first time,
she had somebody who could operate it. Mr. Guizac could drive a tractor,
use the rotary hay-baler, the silage cutter, the combine, the letz mill, or
any other machine she had on the place. He was an expert mechanic, a
carpenter, and a mason. He was thrifty and energetic. Mrs. McIntyre said
she figured he would save her twenty dollars a month on repair bills alone.
She said getting him was the best day's work she had ever done in her life.
He could work milking machines and he was scrupulously clean. He did
not smoke.
 She parked her car on the edge of the cane field and they got out. Sulk,
the young Negro, was attaching the wagon to the cutter and Mr. Guizac
was attaching the cutter to the tractor. He finished first and pushed the
colored boy out of the way and attached the wagon to the cutter himself,
gesticulating with a bright angry face when he wanted the hammer or the
screwdriver. Nothing was done quick enough to suit him. The Negroes
made him nervous.
 The week before, he had come upon Sulk at the dinner hour, sneaking
with a croker sack into the pen where the young turkeys were. He had
watched him take a frying-size turkey from the lot and thrust it in the sack
and put the sack under his coat. Then he had followed him around the 
barn, jumped on him, dragged him to Mrs. McIntyre's back door and had
acted out the entire scene for her, while the Negro muttered and grumbled
and said God might strike him dead if he had been stealing any turkey, he
had only been taking it to put some black shoe polish on its head because
it had the sorehead. God might strike him dead if that was not the truth
before Jesus. Mrs. McIntyre told him to go put the turkey back and then
she was a long time explaining to the Pole that all Negroes would steal.
She finally had to call Rudolph and tell him in English and have him tell
his father in Polish, and Mr. Guizac had gone off with a startled
disappointed face.
 Mrs. Shortley stood by hoping there would be trouble with the silage
machine but there was none. All of Mr. Guizac's motions were quick and
accurate. He jumped on the tractor like a monkey and maneuvered the big
orange cutter into the cane; in a second the silage was spurting in a green
jet out of the pipe into the wagon. He went jolting down the row until he
disappeared from sight and the noise became remote.
 Mrs. McIntyre sighed with pleasure. "At last," she said, "I've got
somebody I can depend on. For years I've been fooling with sorry people.
Sorry people. Poor white trash and niggers," she muttered. "They've
drained me dry. Before you all came I had Ringfields and Collins and 
Jarrells and Perkins and Pinkins and Herrins and God knows what all else
and not a one of them left without taking something off this place that
didn't belong to them. Not a one!"
 Mrs. Shortley could listen to this with composure because she knew
that if Mrs. McIntyre had considered her trash, they couldn't have talked
about trashy people together. Neither of them approved of trash. Mrs.
McIntyre continued with the monologue that Mrs. Shortley had heard
oftentimes before. "I've been running this place for thirty years," she said,
looking with a deep frown out over the field, "and always just barely
making it. People think you're made of money. I have the taxes to pay. I
have the insurance to keep up. I have the repair bills. I have the feed
bills." It all gathered up and she stood with her chest lifted and her small
hands gripped around her elbows. "Ever since the Judge died," she said,
"I've barely been making ends meet and they all take something when
they leave. The niggers don't leave -- they stay and steal. A nigger thinks
anybody is rich he can steal from and that white trash thinks anybody is
rich who can afford to hire people as sorry as they are. And all I've got is
the dirt under my feet!"
 You hire and fire, Mrs. Shortley thought, but she didn't always say
what she thought. She stood by and let Mrs. McIntyre say it all out to the 
end but this time it didn't end as usual. "But at last I'm saved!" Mrs.
McIntyre said. "One fellow's misery is the other fellow's gain. That man
there," and she pointed where the Displaced Person had disappeared, "--
he has to work! He wants to work!" She turned to Mrs. Shortley with her
bright wrinkled face. "That man is my salvation!" she said.
 Mrs. Shortley looked straight ahead as if her vision penetrated the
cane and the hill and pierced through to the other side. "I would suspicion
salvation got from the devil," she said in a slow detached way.
 "Now what do you mean by that?" Mrs. McIntyre asked, looking at
her sharply.
 Mrs. Shortley wagged her head but would not say anything else. The
fact was she had nothing else to say for this intuition had only at that
instant come to her. She had never given much thought to the devil for
she felt that religion was essentially for those people who didn't have the
brains to avoid evil without it. For people like herself, for people of
gumption, it was a social occasion providing the opportunity to sing; but
if she had ever given it much thought, she would have considered the
devil the head of it and God the hanger-on. With the coming of these
displaced people, she was obliged to give new thought to a good many
things. 
 "I know what Sledgewig told Annie Maude," she said, and when Mrs.
McIntyre carefully did not ask her what but reached down and broke off a
sprig of sassafras to chew, she continued in a way to indicate she was not
telling all, "that they wouldn't be able to live long, the four of them, on
seventy dollars a month."
 "He's worth raising," Mrs. McIntyre said. "He saves me money."
 This was as much as to say that Chancey had never saved her money.
Chancey got up at four in the morning to milk her cows, in winter wind
and summer heat, and he had been doing it for the last two years. They
had been with her the longest she had ever had anybody. The gratitude
they got was these hints that she hadn't been saved any money.
 "Is Mr. Shortley feeling better today?" Mrs. McIntyre asked.
 Mrs. Shortley thought it was about time she was asking that question.
Mr. Shortley had been in bed two days with an attack. Mr. Guizac had
taken his place in the dairy in addition to doing his own work, "No he
ain't," she said. "That doctor said he was suffering from over-exhaustion."
 "If Mr. Shortley is over-exhausted," Mrs. McIntyre said, "then he
must have a second job on the side," and she looked at Mrs. Shortley with
almost closed eyes as if she were examining the bottom of a milk can.
 Mrs. Shortley did not say a word but her dark suspicion grew like a 
black thunder cloud. The fact was that Mr. Shortley did have a second job
on the side and that, in a free country, this was none of Mrs. McIntyre's
business. Mr. Shortley made whisky. He had a small still back in the
farthest reaches of the place, on Mrs. McIntyre's land to be sure, but on
land that she only owned and did not cultivate, on idle land that was not
doing anybody any good. Mr. Shortley was not afraid of work. He got up
at four in the morning and milked her cows and in the middle of the day
when he was supposed to be resting, he was off attending to his still. Not
every man would work like that. The Negroes knew about his still but he
knew about theirs so there had never been any disagreeableness between
them. But with foreigners on the place, with people who were all eyes
and no understanding, who had come from a place continually fighting,
where the religion had not been reformed -- with this kind of people, you
had to be on the lookout every minute. She thought there ought to be a
law against them. There was no reason they couldn't stay over there and
take the places of some of the people who had been killed in their wars
and butcherings.
 "What's furthermore," she said suddenly, "Sledgewig said as soon as
her papa saved the money, he was going to buy him a used car. Once they
get them a used car, they'll leave you." 
 "I can't pay him enough for him to save money," Mrs. McIntyre said.
"I'm not worrying about that. Of course," she said then, "if Mr. Shortley
got incapacitated, I would have to use Mr. Guizac in the dairy all the time
and I would have to pay him more. He doesn't smoke," she said, and it
was the fifth time within the week that she had pointed this out.
 "It is no man," Mrs. Shortley said emphatically, "that works as hard as
Chancey, or is as easy with a cow, or is more of a Christian," and she
folded her arms and her gaze pierced the distance. The noise of the tractor
and cutter increased and Mr. Guizac appeared coming around the other
side of the cane row. "Which can not be said about everybody," she
muttered. She wondered whether, if the Pole found Chancey's still, he
would know what it was. The trouble with these people was, you couldn't
tell what they knew. Every time Mr. Guizac smiled, Europe stretched out
in Mrs. Shortley's imagination, mysterious and evil, the devil's
experiment station.
 The tractor, the cutter, the wagon passed, rattling and rumbling and
grinding before them. "Think how long that would have taken with men
and mules to do it," Mrs. McIntyre shouted. "We'll get this whole bottom
cut within two days at this rate."
 "Maybe," Mrs. Shortley muttered, "if don't no terrible accident 
occur." She thought how the tractor had made mules worthless.
Nowadays you couldn't give away a mule. The next thing to go, she
reminded herself, will be niggers.
 In the afternoon she explained what was going to happen to them to
Astor and Sulk who were in the cow lot, filling the manure spreader. She
sat down next to the block of salt under a small shed, her stomach in her
lap, her arms on top of it. "All you colored people better look out," she
said. "You know how much you can get for a mule."
 "Nothing, no indeed," the old man said, "not one thing."
 "Before it was a tractor," she said, "it could be a mule. And before it
was a Displaced Person, it could be a nigger. The time is going to come,"
she prophesied, "when it won't be no more occasion to speak of a nigger."
 The old man laughed politely. "Yes indeed," he said. "Ha ha."
 The young one didn't say anything. He only looked sullen but when
she had gone in the house, he said, "Big Belly act like she know
everything."
 "Never mind," the old man said, "your place too low for anybody to
dispute with you for it."
 She didn't tell her fears about the still to Mr. Shortley until he was
back on the job in the dairy. Then one night after they were in bed, she 
said, "That man prowls."
 Mr. Shortley folded his hands on his bony chest and pretended he was
a corpse.
 "Prowls," she continued and gave him a sharp kick in the side with
her knee. "Who's to say what they know and don't know? Who's to say if
he found it he wouldn't go right to her and tell? How you know they don't
make liquor in Europe? They drive tractors. They got them all kinds of
machinery. Answer me."
 "Don't worry me now," Mr. Shortley said. "I'm a dead man."
 "It's them little eyes of his that's foreign," she muttered. "And that
way he's got of shrugging." She drew her shoulders up and shrugged
several times. "Howcome he's got anything to shrug about?" she asked.
 "If everybody was as dead as I am, nobody would have no trouble,"
Mr. Shortley said.
 "That priest," she muttered and was silent for a minute. Then she said,
"In Europe they probably got some different way to make liquor but I
reckon they know all the ways. They're full of crooked ways. They never
have advanced or reformed. They got the same religion as a thousand
years ago. It could only be the devil responsible for that. Always fighting
amongst each other. Disputing. And then get us into it. Ain't they got us 
into it twict already and we ain't got no more sense than to go over there
and settle it for them and then they come on back over here and snoop
around and find your still and go straight to her. And liable to kiss her
hand any minute. Do you hear me?"
 "No," Mr. Shortley said.
 "And I'll tell you another thing," she said. "I wouldn't be a tall
surprised if he don't know everything you say, whether it be in English or
not."
 "I don't speak no other language," Mr. Shortley murmured.
 "I suspect," she said, "that before long there won't be no more niggers
on this place. And I tell you what. I'd rather have niggers than them Poles.
And what's furthermore, I aim to take up for the niggers when the time
comes. When Gobblehook first come here, you recollect how he shook
their hands, like he didn't know the difference, like he might have been as
black as them, but when it come to finding out Sulk was taking turkeys,
he gone on and told her. I known he was taking turkeys. I could have told
her myself."
 Mr. Shortley was breathing softly as if he were asleep.
 "A nigger don't know when he has a friend," she said. "And I'll tell
you another thing. I get a heap out of Sledgewig. Sledgewig said that in 
Poland they lived in a brick house and one night a man come and told
them to get out of it before daylight. Do you believe they ever lived in a
brick house?
 "Airs," she said. "That's just airs. A wooden house is good enough for
me. Chancey," she said, "turn thisaway. I hate to see niggers mistreated
and run out. I have a heap of pity for niggers and poor folks. Ain't I
always had?" she asked. "I say ain't I always been a friend to niggers and
poor folks?
 "When the time comes," she said, "I'll stand up for the niggers and
that's that. I ain't going to see that priest drive out all the niggers."
 Mrs. McIntyre bought a new drag harrow and a tractor with a power
lift because she said, for the first time, she had someone who could
handle machinery. She and Mrs. Shortley had driven to the back field to
inspect what he had harrowed the day before. "That's been done
beautifully!" Mrs. McIntyre said, looking out over the red undulating
ground.
 Mrs. McIntyre had changed since the Displaced Person had been
working for her and Mrs. Shortley had observed the change very closely: 
she had begun to act like somebody who was getting rich secretly and she
didn't confide in Mrs. Shortley the way she used to. Mrs. Shortley
suspected that the priest was at the bottom of the change. They were very
slick. First he would get her into his Church and then he would get his
hand in her pocketbook. Well, Mrs. Shortley thought, the more fool she!
Mrs. Shortley had a secret herself. She knew something the Displaced
Person was doing that would floor Mrs. McIntyre. "I still say he ain't
going to work forever for seventy dollars a month," she murmured. She
intended to keep her secret to herself and Mr. Shortley.
 "Well," Mrs. McIntyre said, "I may have to get rid of some of this
other help so I can pay him more."
 Mrs. Shortley nodded to indicate she had known this for some time.
"I'm not saying those niggers ain't had it coming," she said. "But they do
the best they know how. You can always tell a nigger what to do and
stand by until he does it."
 "That's what the Judge said," Mrs. McIntyre said and looked at her
with approval. The Judge was her first husband, the one who had left her
the place. Mrs. Shortley had heard that she had married him when she
was thirty and he was seventy-five, thinking she would be rich as soon as
he died, but the old man was a scoundrel and when his estate was settled, 
they found he didn't have a nickel. All he left her were the fifty acres and
the house. But she always spoke of him in a reverent way and quoted his
sayings, such as, "One fellow's misery is the other fellow's gain," and
"The devil you know is better than the devil you don't."
 "However," Mrs. Shortley remarked, "the devil you know is better
than the devil you don't," and she had to turn away so that Mrs. McIntyre
would not see her smile. She had found out what the Displaced Person
was up to through the old man, Astor, and she had not told anybody but
Mr. Shortley. Mr. Shortley had risen straight up in bed like Lazarus from
the tomb.
 "Shut your mouth!" he had said.
 "Yes," she had said.
 "Naw!" Mr. Shortley had said.
 "Yes," she had said.
 Mr. Shortley had fallen back flat.
 "The Pole don't know any better," Mrs. Shortley had said. "I reckon
that priest is putting him up to it is all. I blame the priest."
 The priest came frequently to see the Guizacs and he would always
stop in and visit Mrs. McIntyre too and they would walk around the place
and she would point out her improvements and listen to his rattling talk. It 
suddenly came to Mrs. Shortley that he was trying to persuade her to
bring another Polish family onto the place. With two of them here, there
would be almost nothing spoken but Polish! The Negroes would be gone
and there would be the two families against Mr. Shortley and herself! She
began to imagine a war of words, to see the Polish words and the English
words coming at each other, stalking forward, not sentences, just words,
gabble gabble gabble, flung out high and shrill and stalking forward and
then grappling with each other. She saw the Polish words, dirty and
all-knowing and unreformed, flinging mud on the clean English words
until everything was equally dirty. She saw them all piled up in a room,
all the dead dirty words, theirs and hers too, piled up like the naked
bodies in the newsreel. God save me! she cried silently, from the stinking
power of Satan I And she started from that day to read her Bible with a
new attention. She poured over the Apocalypse and began to quote from
the Prophets and before long she had come to a deeper understanding of
her existence. She saw plainly that the meaning of the world was a
mystery that had been planned and she was not surprised to suspect that
she had a special part in the plan because she was strong. She saw that the
Lord God Almighty had created the strong people to do what had to be
done and she felt that she would be ready when she was called. Right 
now she felt that her business was to watch the priest.
 His visits irked her more and more. On the last one, he went about
picking up feathers off the ground. He found two peacock feathers and
four or five turkey feathers and an old brown hen feather and took them
off with him like a bouquet. This foolish-acting did not deceive Mrs.
Shortley any. Here he was: leading foreigners over in hoards to places
that were not theirs, to cause disputes, to uproot niggers, to plant the
Whore of Babylon in the midst of the righteousl Whenever he came on
the place, she hid herself behind something and watched until he left.
 It was on a Sunday afternoon that she had her vision. She had gone to
drive in the cows for Mr. Shortley who had a pain in his knee and she was
walking slowly through the pasture, her arms folded, her eyes on the
distant low-lying clouds that looked like rows and rows of white fish
washed up on a great blue beach. She paused after an incline to heave a
sigh of exhaustion for she had an immense weight to carry around and
she was not as young as she used to be. At times she could feel her heart,
like a child's fist, clenching and unclenching inside her chest, and when
the feeling came, it stopped her thought altogether and she would go
about like a large hull of herself, moving for no reason; but she gained
this incline without a tremor and stood at the top of it, pleased with 
herself. Suddenly while she watched, the sky folded back in two pieces
like the curtain to a stage and a gigantic figure stood facing her. It was the
color of the sun in the early afternoon, white-gold. It was of no definite
shape but there were fiery wheels with fierce dark eyes in them, spinning
rapidly all around it. She was not able to tell if the figure was going
forward or backward because its magnificence was so great. She shut her
eyes in order to look at it and it turned blood-red and the wheels turned
white. A voice, very resonant, said the one word, "Prophesy!"
 She stood there, tottering slightly but still upright, her eyes shut tight
and her fists clenched and her straw sun hat low on her forehead. "The
children of wicked nations will be butchered," she said in a loud voice.
"Legs where arms should be, foot to face, ear in the palm of hand. Who
will remain whole? Who will remain whole? Who?"
 Presently she opened her eyes. The sky was full of white fish carried
lazily on their sides by some invisible current and pieces of the sun,
submerged some distance beyond them, appeared from time to time as if
they were being washed in the opposite direction. Woodenly she planted
one foot in front of the other until she had crossed the pasture and reached
the lot. She walked through the barn like one in a daze and did not speak
to Mr. Shortley. She continued up the road until she saw the priest's car 
parked in front of Mrs. McIntyre's house. "Here again," she muttered.
"Come to destroy."
 Mrs. McIntyre and the priest were walking in the yard. In order not to
meet them face to face, she turned to the left and entered the feed house, a
single-room shack piled on one side with flowered sacks of scratch feed.
There were spilled oyster shells in one corner and a few old dirty
calendars on the wall, advertising calf feed and various patent medicine
remedies. One showed a bearded gentleman in a frock coat, holding up a
bottle, and beneath his feet was the inscription, "I have been made regular
by this marvelous disco very!" Mrs. Shortley had always felt close to this
man as if he were some distinguished person she was acquainted with but
now her mind was on nothing but the dangerous presence of the priest.
She stationed herself at a crack between two boards where she could look
out and see him and Mrs. McIntyre strolling toward the turkey brooder,
which was placed just outside the feed house.
 "Arrrrr!" he said as they approached the brooder. "Look at the little
biddies!" and he stooped and squinted through the wire.
 Mrs. Shortley's mouth twisted.
 "Do you think the Guizacs will want to leave me?" Mrs. McIntyre
asked. "Do you think they'll go to Chicago or some place like that?" 
 "And why should they do that now?" asked the priest, wiggling his
finger at a turkey, his big nose close to the wire.
 "Money," Mrs. McIntyre said.
 "Arrrr, give them some morrre then," he said indifferently. "They
have to get along."
 "So do I," Mrs. McIntyre muttered. "It means I'm going to have to get
rid o?some of these others."
 "And arrre the Shortleys satisfactory?" he inquired, paying more
attention to the turkeys than to her.
 "Five times in the last month I've found Mr. Shortley smoking in the
barn," Mrs. McIntyre said. "Five times."
 "And arrre the Negroes any better?"
 "They lie and steal and have to be watched all the time," she said.
 "Tsk, tsk," he said. "Which will you discharge?"
 "I've decided to give Mr. Shortley his month's notice tomorrow," Mrs.
McIntyre said.
 The priest scarcely seemed to hear her he was so busy wiggling his
finger inside the wire. Mrs. Shortley sat down on an open sack of laying
mash with a dead thump that sent feed dust clouding up around her. She
found herself looking straight ahead at the opposite wall where the 
gentleman on the calendar was holding up his marvelous discovery but
she didn't see him. She looked ahead as if she saw nothing whatsoever.
Then she rose and ran to her house. Her face was an almost volcanic red.
 She opened all the drawers and dragged out boxes and old battered
suitcases from under the bed. She began to unload the drawers into the
boxes, all the time without pause, without taking off the sunhat she had
on her head. She set the two girls to doing the same. When Mr. Shortley
came in, she did not even look at him but merely pointed one arm at him
while she packed with the other. "Bring the car around to the back door,"
she said. "You ain't waiting to be fired!"
 Mr. Shortley had never in his life doubted her omniscience. He
perceived the entire situation in half a second and, with only a sour scowl,
retreated out the door and went to drive the automobile around to the
back.
 They tied the two iron beds to the top of the car and the two rocking
chairs inside the beds and rolled the two mattresses up between the
rocking chairs. On top of this they tied a crate of chickens. They loaded
the inside of the car with the old suitcases and boxes, leaving a small
space for Annie Maude and Sarah Mae. It took them the rest of the
afternoon and half the night to do this but Mrs. Shortley was determined 
that they would leave before four o'clock in the morning, that Mr.
Shortley should not adjust another milking machine on this place. All the
time she had been working, her face was changing rapidly from red to
white and back again.
 Just before dawn, as it began to drizzle rain, they were ready to leave.
They all got in the car and sat there cramped up between boxes and
bundles and rolls of bedding. The square black automobile moved off
with more than its customary grinding noises as if it were protesting the
load. In the back, the two long bony yellow-haired girls were sitting on a
pile of boxes and there was a beagle hound puppy and a cat with two
kittens somewhere under the blankets. The car moved slowly, like some
overfreighted leaking ark, away from their shack and past the white house
where Mrs. McIntyre was sleeping soundly -- hardly guessing that her
cows would not be milked by Mr. Shortley that morning -- and past the
Pole's shack on top of the hill and on down the road to the gate where the
two Negroes were walking, one behind the other, on their way to help
with the milking. They looked straight at the car and its occupants but
even as the dim yellow headlights lit up their faces, they politely did not
seem to see anything, or anyhow, to attach significance to what was there.
The loaded car might have been passing mist in the early morning 
half-light. They continued up the road at the same even pace without
looking back.
 A dark yellow sun was beginning to rise in a sky that was the same
slick dark gray as the highway. The fields stretched away, stiff and weedy,
on either side. "Where we goin?" Mr. Shortley asked for the first time.
 Mrs. Shortley sat with one foot on a packing box so that her knee was
pushed into her stomach. Mr. Shortley's elbow was almost under her nose
and Sarah Mae's bare left foot was sticking over the front seat, touching
her ear.
 "Where we goin?" Mr. Shortley repeated and when she didn't answer
again, he turned and looked at her.
 Fierce heat seemed to be swelling slowly and fully into her face as if
it were welling up now for a final assault. She was sitting in an erect way
in spite of the fact that one leg was twisted under her and one knee was
almost into her neck, but there was a peculiar lack of light in her icy blue
eyes. All the vision in them might have been turned around, looking
inside her. She suddenly grabbed Mr. Shortley's elbow and Sarah Mae's
foot at the same time and began to tug and pull on them as if she were
trying to fit the two extra limbs onto herself.
 Mr. Shortley began to curse and quickly stopped the car and Sarah 
Mae yelled to quit but Mrs. Shortley apparently intended to rearrange the
whole car at once. She thrashed forward and backward, clutching at
everything she could get her hands on and hugging it to herself, Mr.
Shortley's head, Sarah Mae's leg, the cat, a wad of white bedding, her
own big moon-like knee; then all at once her fierce expression faded into
a look of astonishment and her grip on what she had loosened. One of her
eyes drew near to the other and seemed to collapse quietly and she was
still.
 The two girls, who didn't know what had happened to her, began to
say, "Where we goin, Ma? Where we goin?" They thought she was
playing a joke and that their father, staring straight ahead at her, was
imitating a dead man. They didn't know that she had had a great
experience or ever been displaced in the world from all that belonged to
her. They were frightened by the gray slick road before them and they
kept repeating in higher and higher voices, "Where we goin, Ma? Where
we goin?" while their mother, her huge body rolled back still against the
seat and her eyes like blue-painted glass, seemed to contemplate for the
first time the tremendous frontiers of her true country. 
 II
 "Well," Mrs. McIntyre said to the old Negro, "we can get along
without them. We've seen them come and seen them go -- black and
white." She was standing in the calf barn while he cleaned it and she held
a rake in her hand and now and then pulled a corn cob from a corner or
pointed to a soggy spot that he had missed. When she discovered the
Shortleys were gone, she was delighted as it meant she wouldn't have to
fire them. The people she hired always left her -- because they were that
kind of people. Of all the families she had had, the Shortleys were the
best if she didn't count the Displaced Person. They had been not quite
trash; Mrs. Shortley was a good woman, and she would miss her but as
the Judge used to say, you couldn't have your pie and eat it too, and she
was satisfied with the D. P. "We've seen them come and seen them go,"
she repeated with satisfaction.
 "And me and you," the old man said, stooping to drag his hoe under a
feed rack, "is still here." 
 She caught exactly what he meant her to catch in his tone. Bars of
sunlight fell from the cracked ceiling across his back and cut him in three
distinct parts. She watched his long hands clenched around the hoe and
his crooked old profile pushed close to them. You might have been here
_before_ I was, she said to herself, but it's mighty likely I'll be here when
you're gone. "I've spent half my life fooling with worthless people," she
said in a severe voice, "but now I'm through."
 "Black and white," he said, "is the same."
 "I am through," she repeated and gave her dark smock that she had
thrown over her shoulders like a cape a quick snatch at the neck. She had
on a broad-brimmed black straw hat that had cost her twenty dollars
twenty years ago and that she used now for a sunhat. "Money is the root
of all evil," she said. "The Judge said so every day. He said he deplored
money. He said the reason you niggers were so uppity was because there
was so much money in circulation."
 The old Negro had known the Judge. "Judge say he long for the day
when he be too poor to pay a nigger to work," he said. "Say when that
day come, the world be back on its feet."
 She leaned forward, her hands on her hips and her neck stretched and
said, "Well that day has almost come around here and I'm telling each and 
every one of you: you better look sharp. I don't have to put up with
foolishness any more. I have somebody now who _has_ to work!"
 The old man knew when to answer and when not. At length he said,
"We seen them come and we seen them go."
 "However, the Shortleys were not the worst by far," she said. "I well
remember those Garrits."
 "They was before them Collinses," he said.
 "No, before the Ringfields."
 "Sweet Lord, them Ringfields!" he murmured.
 "None of that kind _want_ to work," she said.
 "We seen them come and we seen them go," he said as if this were a
refrain. "But we ain't never had one before," he said, bending himself up
until he faced her, "like what we got now." He was cinnamon-colored
with eyes that were so blurred with age that they seemed to be hung
behind cobwebs.
 She gave him an intense stare and held it until, lowering his hands on
the hoe, he bent down again and dragged a pile of shavings alongside the
wheelbarrow. She said stiffly, "He can wash out that barn in the time it
took Mr. Shortley to make up his mind he had to do it."
 "He from Pole," the old man muttered. 
 "From Poland."
 "In Pole it ain't like it is here," he said. "They got different ways of
doing," and he began to mumble unintelligibly.
 "What are you saying?" she said. "If you have anything to say about
him, say it and say it aloud."
 He was silent, bending his knees precariously and edging the rake
along the underside of the trough.
 "If you know anything he's done that he shouldn't, I expect you to
report it to me," she said.
 "It warn't like it was what he should ought or oughtn't," he muttered.
"It was like what nobody else don't do."
 "You don't have anything against him," she said shortly, "and he's
here to stay."
 "We ain't never had one like him before is all," he murmured and gave
his polite laugh.
 "Times are changing," she said. "Do you know what's happening to
this world? It's swelling up. It's getting so full of people that only the
smart thrifty energetic ones are going to survive," and she tapped the
words, smart, thrifty, and energetic out on the palm of her hand. Through
the far end of the stall she could see down the road to where the 
Displaced Person was standing in the open barn door with the green hose
in his hand. There was a certain stiffness about his figure that seemed to
make it necessary for her to approach him slowly, even in her thoughts.
She had decided this was because she couldn't hold an easy conversation
with him. Whenever she said anything to him, she found herself shouting
and nodding extravagantly and she would be conscious that one of the
Negroes was leaning behind the nearest shed, watching.
 "No indeed!" she said, sitting down on one of the feed racks and
folding her arms, "I've made up my mind that I've had enough trashy
people on this place to last me a lifetime and I'm not going to spend my
last years fooling with Shortleys and Ringfields and Collins when the
world is full of people who _have_ to work."
 "Howcome they so many extra?" he asked.
 "People are selfish," she said. "They have too many children. There's
no sense in it any more."
 He had picked up the wheelbarrow handles and was backing out the
door and he paused, half in the sunlight and half out, and stood there
chewing his gums as if he had forgotten which direction he wanted to
move in.
 "What you colored people don't realize," she said, "is that I'm the one 
around here who holds all the strings together. If you don't work, I don't
make any money and I can't pay you. You're all dependent on me but you
each and every one act like the shoe is on the other foot."
 It was not possible to tell from his face if he heard her. Finally he
backed out with the wheelbarrow. "Judge say the devil he know is better
than the devil he don't," he said in a clear mutter and turned and trundled
off.
 She got up and followed him, a deep vertical pit appearing suddenly
in the center of her forehead, just under the red bangs. "The Judge has
long since ceased to pay the bills around here," she called in a piercing
voice.
 He was the only one of her Negroes who had known the Judge and he
thought this gave him title. He had had a low opinion of Mr. Crooms and
Mr. McIntyre, her other husbands, and in his veiled polite way, he had
congratulated her after each of her divorces. When he thought it necessary,
he would work under a window where he knew she was sitting and talk to
himself, a careful roundabout discussion, question and answer and then
refrain. Once she had got up silently and slammed the window down so
hard that he had fallen backwards off his feet. Or occasionally he spoke
with the peacock. The cock would follow him around the place, his 
steady eye on the ear of corn that stuck up from the old man's back pocket
or he would sit near him and pick himself. Once from the open kitchen
door, she had heard him say to the bird, "I remember when it was twenty
of you walking about this place and now it's only you and two hens.
Crooms it was twelve. McIntyre it was five. You and two hens now."
 And that time she had stepped out of the door onto the porch and said,
"MISTER Crooms and MISTER McIntyre! And I don't want to hear you
call either of them anything else again. And you can understand this:
when that peachicken dies there won't be any replacements."
 She kept the peacock only out of a superstitious fear of annoying the
Judge in his grave. He had liked to see them walking around the place for
he said they made him feel rich. Of her three husbands, the Judge was the
one most present to her although he was the only one she had buried. He
was in the family graveyard, a little space fenced in the middle of the
back cornfield, with his mother and father and grandfather and three great
aunts and two infant cousins. Mr. Crooms, her second, was forty miles
away in the state asylum and Mr. McIntyre, her last, was intoxicated, she
supposed, in some hotel room in Florida. But the Judge, sunk in the
cornfield with his family, was always at home.
 She had married him when he was an old man and because of his 
money but there had been another reason that she would not admit then,
even to herself: she had liked him. He was a dirty snuff-dipping Court
House figure, famous all over the county for being rich, who wore
high-top shoes, a string tie, a gray suit with a black stripe in it, and a
yellowed panama hat, winter and summer. His teeth and hair were
tobacco-colored and his face a clay pink pitted and tracked with
mysterious prehistoric-looking marks as if he had been unearthed among
fossils. There had been a peculiar odor about him of sweaty fondled bills
but he never carried money on him or had a nickel to show. She was his
secretary for a few months and the old man with his sharp eye had seen at
once that here was a woman who admired him for himself. The three
years that he lived after they married were the happiest and most
prosperous of Mrs. McIntyre's life, but when he died his estate proved to
be bankrupt. He left her a mortgaged house and fifty acres that he had
managed to cut the timber off before he died. It was as if, as the final
triumph of a successful life, he had been able to take everything with him.
 But she had survived. She had survived a succession of tenant farmers
and dairymen that the old man himself would have found hard to outdo,
and she had been able to meet the constant drain of a tribe of moody
unpredictable Negroes, and she had even managed to hold her own 
against the incidental bloodsuckers, the cattle dealers and lumber men
and the buyers and sellers of anything who drove up in pieced-together
trucks and honked in the yard.
 She stood slightly reared back with her arms folded under her smock
and a satisfied expression on her face as she watched the Displaced
Person turn off the hose and disappear inside the barn. She was sorry that
the poor man had been chased out of Poland and run across Europe and
had had to take up in a tenant shack in a strange country, but she had not
been responsible for any of this. She had had a hard time herself. She
knew what it was to struggle. People ought to have to struggle. Mr.
Guizac had probably had everything given to him all the way across
Europe and over here. He had probably not had to struggle enough. She
had given him a job. She didn't know if he was grateful or not. She didn't
know anything about him except that he did the work. The truth was that
he was not very real to her yet. He was a kind of miracle that she had seen
happen and that she talked about but that she still didn't believe.
 She watched as he came out of the barn and motioned to Sulk, who
was coming around the back of the lot. He gesticulated and then took
something out of his pocket and the two of them stood looking at it. She
started down the lane toward them. The Negro's figure was slack and tall 
and he was craning his round head forward in his usual idiotic way. He
was a little better than half-witted but when they were like that they were
always good workers. The Judge had said always hire you a half-witted
nigger because they don't have sense enough to stop working. The Pole
was gesticulating rapidly. He left something with the colored boy and
then walked off and before she rounded the turn in the lane, she heard the
tractor crank up. He was on his way to the field. The Negro was still
hanging there, gaping at whatever he had in his hand.
 She entered the lot and walked through the barn, looking with
approval at the wet spotless concrete floor. It was only nine-thirty and Mr.
Shortley had never got anything washed until eleven. As she came out at
the other end, she saw the Negro moving very slowly in a diagonal path
across the road in front of her, his eyes still on what Mr. Guizac had given
him. He didn't see her and he paused and dipped his knees and leaned
over his hand, his tongue describing little circles. He had a photograph.
He lifted one finger and traced it lightly over the surface of the picture.
Then he looked up and saw her and seemed to freeze, his mouth in a
half-grin, his finger lifted.
 "Why haven't you gone to the field?" she asked.
 He raised one foot and opened his mouth wider while the hand with 
the photograph edged toward his back pocket.
 "What's that?" she said.
 "It ain't nothin," he muttered and handed it to her automatically.
 It was a photograph of a girl of about twelve in a white dress. She had
blond hair with a wreath in it and she looked forward out of light eyes
that were bland and composed. "Who is this child?" Mrs. McIntyre asked.
 "She his cousin," the boy said in a high voice.
 "Well what are you doing with it?" she asked.
 "She going to mah me," he said in an even higher voice.
 "Marry you!" she shrieked.
 "I pays half to get her over here," he said. "I pays him three dollar a
week. She bigger now. She his cousin. She don't care who she mah she so
glad to get away from there." The high voice seemed to shoot up like a
nervous jet of sound and then fall flat as he watched her face. Her eyes
were the color of blue granite when the glare falls on it, but she was not
looking at him. She was looking down the road where the distant sound
of the tractor could be heard.
 "I don't reckon she goin to come nohow," the boy murmured.
 "I'll see that you get every cent of your money back," she said in a
toneless voice and turned and walked off, holding the photograph bent in 
two. There was nothing about her small stiff figure to indicate that she
was shaken.
 As soon as she got in the house, she lay down on her bed and shut her
eyes and pressed her hand over her heart as if she were trying to keep it in
place. Her mouth opened and she made two or three dry little sounds.
Then after a minute she sat up and said aloud, "They're all the same. It's
always been like this," and she fell back flat again. "Twenty years of
being beaten and done in and they even robbed his grave!" and
remembering that, she began to cry quietly, wiping her eyes every now
and then with the hem of her smock.
 What she had thought of was the angel over the Judge's grave. This
had been a naked granite cherub that the old man had seen in the city one
day in a tombstone store window. He had been taken with it at once,
partly because its face reminded him of his wife and partly because he
wanted a genuine work of art over his grave. He had come home with it
sitting on the green plush train seat beside him. Mrs. McIntyre had never
noticed the resemblance to herself. She had always thought it hideous but
when the Herrins stole it off the old man's grave, she was shocked and
outraged. Mrs. Herrin had thought it very pretty and had walked to the
graveyard frequently to see it, and when the Herrins left the angel left 
with them, all but its toes, for the ax old man Herrin had used to break it
off with had struck slightly too high. Mrs. McIntyre had never been able
to afford to have it replaced.
 When she had cried all she could, she got up and went into the back
hall, a closet-like space that was dark and quiet as a chapel and sat down
on the edge of the Judge's black mechanical chair with her elbow on his
desk. This was a giant roll-top piece of furniture pocked with pigeon
holes full of dusty papers. Old bankbooks and ledgers were stacked in the
half-open drawers and there was a small safe, empty but locked, set like a
tabernacle in the center of it. She had left this part of the house
unchanged since the old man's time. It was a kind of memorial to him,
sacred because he had conducted his business here. With the slightest tilt
one way or the other, the chair gave a rusty skeletal groan that sounded
something like him when he had complained of his poverty. It had been
his first principle to talk as if he were the poorest man in the world and
she followed it, not only because he had but because it was true. When
she sat with her intense constricted face turned toward the empty safe, she
knew there was nobody poorer in the world than she was.
 She sat motionless at the desk for ten or fifteen minutes and then as if
she had gained some strength, she got up and got in her car and drove to 
the cornfield.
 The road ran through a shadowy pine thicket and ended on top of a
hill that rolled fan-wise down and up again in a broad expanse of tasseled
green. Mr. Guizac was cutting from the outside of the field in a circular
path to the center where the graveyard was all but hidden by the corn, and
she could see him on the high far side of the slope, mounted on the tractor
with the cutter and wagon behind him. From time to time, he had to get
off the tractor and climb in the wagon to spread the silage because the
Negro had not arrived. She watched impatiently, standing in front of her
black coupe with her arms folded under her smock, while he progressed
slowly around the rim of the field, gradually getting close enough for her
to wave to him to get down. He stopped the machine and jumped off and
came running forward, wiping his red jaw with a piece of grease rag.
 "I want to talk to you," she said and beckoned him to the edge of the
thicket where it was shady. He took off the cap and followed her, smiling,
but his smile faded when she turned and faced him. Her eyebrows, thin
and fierce as a spider's leg, had drawn together ominously and the deep
vertical pit had plunged down from under the red bangs into the bridge of
her nose. She removed the bent picture from her pocket and handed it to
him silently. Then she stepped back and said, "Mr. Guizac! You would 
bring this poor innocent child over here and try to marry her to a
half-witted thieving black stinking niggerl What kind of a monster are
you!"
 He took the photograph with a slowly returning smile. "My cousin,"
he said. "She twelve here. First Communion. Six-ten now."
 Monster! she said to herself and looked at him as if she were seeing
him for the first time. His forehead and skull were white where they had
been protected by his cap but the rest of his face was red and bristled with
short yellow hairs. His eyes were like two bright nails behind his
gold-rimmed spectacles that had been mended over the nose with haywire.
His whole face looked as if it might have been patched together out of
several others. "Mr. Guizac," she said, beginning slowly and then
speaking faster until she ended breathless in the middle of a word, "that
nigger cannot have a white wife from Europe. You can't talk to a nigger
that way. You'll excite him and besides it can't be done. Maybe it can be
done in Poland but it can't be done here and you'll have to stop. It's all
foolishness. That nigger don't have a grain of sense and you'll excite . . ."
 "She in camp three year," he said.
 "Your cousin," she said in a positive voice, "cannot come over here
and marry one of my Negroes." 
 "She six-ten year," he said. "From Poland. Mamma die, pappa die.
She wait in camp. Three camp." He pulled a wallet from his pocket and
fingered through it and took out another picture of the same girl, a few
years older, dressed in something dark and shapeless. She was standing
against a wall with a short woman who apparently had no teeth. "She
mamma," he said, pointing to the woman. "She die in two camp."
 "Mr. Guizac," Mrs. McIntyre said, pushing the picture back at him, "I
will not have my niggers upset. I cannot run this place without my
niggers. I can run it without you but not without them and if you mention
this girl to Sulk again, you won't have a job with me. Do you
understand?"
 His face showed no comprehension. He seemed to be piecing all these
words together in his mind to make a thought.
 Mrs. McIntyre remembered Mrs. Shortley's words: "He understands
everything, he only pretends he don't so as to do exactly as he pleases,"
and her face regained the look of shocked wrath she had begun with. "I
cannot understand how a man who calls himself a Christian," she said,
"could bring a poor innocent girl over here and marry her to something
like that. I cannot understand it. I cannot!" and she shook her head and
looked into the distance with a pained blue gaze. 
 After a second he shrugged and let his arms drop as if he were tired.
"She no care black," he said. "She in camp three year."
 Mrs. McIntyre felt a peculiar weakness behind her knees. "Mr.
Guizac," she said, "I don't want to have, to speak to you about this again.
If I do, you'll have to find another place yourself, Do you understand?"
 The patched face did not say. She had the impression that he didn't see
her there. "This is my place," she said. "I say who will come here and
who won't."
 "Ya," he said and put back on his cap.
 "I am not responsible for the world's misery," she said as an
afterthought.
 "Ya," he said.
 "You have a good job. You should be grateful to be here," she added,
"but I'm not sure you are."
 "Ya," he said and gave his little shrug and turned back to the tractor.
 She watched him get on and maneuver the machine into the corn
again. When he had passed her and rounded the turn, she climbed to the
top of the slope and stood with her arms folded and looked out grimly
over the field. "They're all the same," she muttered, "whether they come
from Poland or Tennessee. I've handled Herrins and Ringfields and 
Shortleys and I can handle a Guizac," and she narrowed her gaze until it
closed entirely around the diminishing figure on the tractor as if she were
watching him through a gunsight. All her life she had been fighting the
world's overflow and now she had it in the form of a Pole. "You're just
like all the rest of them," she said, "-- only smart and thrifty and energetic
but so am I. And this is my place," and she stood there, a small
black-hatted, black-smocked figure with an aging cherubic face, and
folded her arms as if she were equal to anything. But her heart was
beating as if some interior violence had already been done to her. She
opened her eyes to include the whole field so that the figure on the tractor
was no larger than a grasshopper in her widened view.
 She stood there for some time. There was a slight breeze and the corn
trembled in great waves on both sides of the slope. The big cutter, with its
monotonous roar, continued to shoot it pulverized into the wagon in a
steady spurt of fodder. By nightfall, the Displaced Person would have
worked his way around and around until there would be nothing on either
side of the two hills but the stubble, and down in the center, risen like a
little island, the graveyard where the Judge lay grinning under his
desecrated monument. 
 III
 The priest, with his long bland face supported on one finger, had been
talking for ten minutes about Purgatory while Mrs. McIntyre squinted
furiously at him from an opposite chair. They were drinking ginger ale on
her front porch and she had kept rattling the ice in her glass, rattling her
beads, rattling her bracelet like an impatient pony jingling its harness.
There is no moral obligation to keep him, she was saying under her breath,
there is absolutely no moral obligation. Suddenly she lurched up and her
voice fell across his brogue like a drill into a mechanical saw. "Listen!"
she said, "I'm not theological. I'm practical! I want to talk to you about
something practical!"
 "Arrrrrrr," he groaned, grating to a halt.
 She had put at least a finger of whisky in her own ginger ale so that
she would be able to endure his full-length visit and she sat down
awkwardly, finding the chair closer to her than she had expected. "Mr. 
Guizac is not satisfactory," she said.
 The old man raised his eyebrows in mock wonder.
 "He's extra," she said. "He doesn't fit in. I have to have somebody
who fits in."
 The priest carefully turned his hat on his knees. He had a little trick of
waiting a second silently and then swinging the conversation back into
his own paths. He was about eighty. She had never known a priest until
she had gone to see this one on the business of getting her the Displaced
Person. After he had got her the Pole, he had used the business
introduction to try to convert her -- just as she had supposed he would.
 "Give him time," the old man said. "He'll learn to fit in. Where is that
beautiful birrrrd of yours?" he asked and then said, "Arrrrr, I see him!"
and stood up and looked out over the lawn where the peacock and the two
hens were stepping at a strained attention, their long necks ruffled, the
cock's violent blue and the hens' silver-green, glinting in the late
afternoon sun.
 "Mr. Guizac," Mrs. McIntyre continued, bearing down with a flat
steady voice, "is very efficient. I'll admit that. But he doesn't understand
how to get on with my niggers and they don't like him. I can't have my
niggers run off. And I don't like his attitude. He's not in the least grateful 
for being here."
 The priest had his hand on the screen door and he opened it, ready to
make his escape. "Arrrr, I must be off," he murmured.
 "I tell you if I had a white man who understood the Negroes, I'd have
to let Mr. Guizac go," she said and stood up again.
 He turned then and looked her in the face. "He has nowhere to go," he
said. Then he said, "Dear lady, I know you well enough to know you
wouldn't turn him out for a trifle!" and without waiting for an answer, he
raised his hand and gave her his blessing in a rumbling voice.
 She smiled angrily and said, "I didn't create his situation, of course."
 The priest let his eyes wander toward the birds. They had reached the
middle of the lawn. The cock stopped suddenly and curving his neck
backwards, he raised his tail and spread it with a shimmering timbrous
noise. Tiers of small pregnant suns floated in a green-gold haze over his
head. The priest stood transfixed, his jaw slack Mrs. McIntyre wondered
where she had ever seen such an idiotic old man. "Christ will come like
that!" he said in a loud gay voice and wiped his hand over his mouth and
stood there, gaping.
 Mrs. McIntyre's face assumed a set puritanical expression and she
reddened. Christ in the conversation embarrassed her the way sex had her 
mother. "It is not my responsibility that Mr. Guizac has nowhere to go,"
she said. "I don't find myself responsible for all the extra people in the
world."
 The old man didn't seem to hear her. His attention was fixed on the
cock who was taking minute steps backward, his head against the spread
tail. "The Transfiguration," he murmured.
 She had no idea what he was talking about. "Mr. Guizac didn't have to
come here in the first place," she said, giving him a hard look.
 The cock lowered his tail and began to pick grass.
 "He didn't have to come in the first place," she repeated, emphasizing
each word.
 The old man smiled absently. "He came to redeem us," he said and
blandly reached for her hand and shook it and said he must go.
 If Mr. Shortley had not returned a few weeks later, she would have
gone out looking for a new man to hire. She had not wanted him back but
when she saw the familiar black automobile drive up the road and stop by
the side of the house, she had the feeling that she was the one returning,
after a long miserable trip, to her own place. She realized all at once that 
it was Mrs. Shortley she had been missing. She had had no one to talk to
since Mrs. Shortley left, and she ran to the door, expecting to see her
heaving herself up the steps.
 Mr. Shortley stood there alone. He had on a black felt hat and a shirt
with red and blue palm trees designed in it but the hollows in his long
bitten blistered face were deeper than they had been a month ago.
 "Well!" she said. "Where is Mrs. Shortley?"
 Mr. Shortley didn't say anything. The change in his face seemed to
have come from the inside; he looked like a man who had gone for a long
time without water. "She was God's own angel," he said in a loud voice.
"She was the sweetest woman in the world."
 "Where is she?" Mrs. McIntyre murmured.
 "Daid," he said. "She had herself a stroke on the day she left out of
here." There was a corpse-like composure about his face "I figure that
Pole killed her," he said. "She seen through him from the first. She known
he come from the devil. She told me so."
 It took Mrs. McIntyre three days to get over Mrs. Shortley's death.
She told herself that anyone would have thought they were kin. She
rehired Mr. Shortley to do farm work though actually she didn't want him
without his wife. She told him she was going to give thirty days' notice to 
the Displaced Person at the end of the month and that then he could have
his job back in the dairy. Mr. Shortley preferred the dairy job but he was
willing to wait. He said it would give him some satisfaction to see the
Pole leave the place, and Mrs. McIntyre said it would give her a great
deal of satisfaction. She confessed that she should have been content with
the help she had in the first place and not have been reaching into other
parts of the world for it. Mr. Shortley said he never had cared for
foreigners since he had been in the first world's war and seen what they
were like. He said he had seen all kinds then but that none of them were
like us. He said he recalled the face of one man who had thrown a
hand-grenade at him and that the man had had little round eye-glasses
exactly like Mr. Guizac's.
 "But Mr. Guizac is a Pole, he's not a German," Mrs. McIntyre said.
 "It ain't a great deal of difference in them two kinds," Mr. Shortley
had explained.
 The Negroes were pleased to see Mr. Shortley back. The Displaced
Person had expected them to work as hard as he worked himself, whereas
Mr. Shortley recognized their limitations. He had never been a very good
worker himself with Mrs. Shortley to keep him in line, but without her, he
was even more forgetful and slow. The Pole worked as fiercely as ever 
and seemed to have no inkling that he was about to be fired. Mrs.
McIntyre saw jobs done in a short time that she had thought would never
get done at all. Still she was resolved to get rid of him. The sight of his
small stiff figure moving quickly here and there had come to be the most
irritating sight on the place for her, and she felt she had been tricked by
the old priest. He had said there was no legal obligation for her to keep
the Displaced Person if he was not satisfactory, but then he had brought
up the moral one.
 She meant to tell him that _her_ moral obligation was to her own
people, to Mr. Shortley, who had fought in the world war for his country
and not to Mr. Guizac who had merely arrived here to take advantage of
whatever he could. She felt she must have this out with the priest before
she fired the Displaced Person. When the first of the month came and the
priest hadn't called, she put off giving the Pole notice for a little longer.
 Mr. Shortley told himself that he should have known all along that no
woman was going to do what she said she was when she said she was. He
didn't know how long he could afford to put up with her shilly-shallying.
He thought himself that she was going soft and was afraid to turn the Pole
out for fear he would have a hard time getting another place. He could tell
her the truth about this: that if she let him go, in three years he would own 
his own house and have a television aerial sitting on top of it. As a matter
of policy, Mr. Shortley began to come to her back door every evening to
put certain facts before her. "A white man sometimes don't get the
consideration a nigger gets," he said, "but that don't matter because he's
still white, but sometimes," and here he would pause and look off into the
distance, "a man that's fought and bled and died in the service of his
native land don't get the consideration of one of them like them he was
fighting. I ast you: is that right?" When he asked her such questions he
could watch her face and tell he was making an impression. She didn't
look too well these days. He noticed lines around her eyes that hadn't
been there when he and Mrs. Shortley had been the only white help on
the place. Whenever he thought of Mrs. Shortley, he felt his heart go
down like an old bucket into a dry well.
 The old priest kept away as if he had been frightened by his last visit
but finally, seeing that the Displaced Person had not been fired, he
ventured to call again to take up giving Mrs. McIntyre instructions where
he remembered leaving them off. She had not asked to be instructed but
he instructed anyway, forcing a little definition of one of the sacraments
or of some dogma into each conversation he had, no matter with whom.
He sat on her porch, taking no notice of her partly mocking, partly 
outraged expression as she sat shaking her foot, waiting for an
opportunity to drive a wedge into his talk. "For," he was saying, as if he
spoke of something that had happened yesterday in town, "when God sent
his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ Our Lord" -- he slightly bowed his
head -- "as a Redeemer to mankind, He . . ."
 "Father Flynn!" she said in a voice that made him jump. "I want to
talk to you about something serious!"
 The skin under the old man's right eye flinched.
 "As far as I'm concerned," she said and glared at him fiercely, "Christ
was just another D. P."
 He raised his hands slightly and let them drop on his knees. "Arrrrrr,"
he murmured as if he were considering this.
 "I'm going to let that man go," she said. "I don't have any obligation
to him. My obligation is to the people who've done something for their
country, not to the ones who've just come over to take advantage of what
they can get," and she began to talk rapidly, remembering all her
arguments. The priest's attention seemed to retire to some private oratory
to wait until she got through. Once or twice his gaze roved out onto the
lawn as if he were hunting some means of escape but she didn't stop. She
told him how she had been hanging onto this place for thirty years, 
always just barely making it against people who came from nowhere and
were going nowhere, who didn't want anything but an automobile. She
said she had found out they were the same whether they came from
Poland or Tennessee. When the Guizacs got ready, she said, they would
not hesitate to leave her. She told him how the people who looked rich
were the poorest of all because they had the most to keep up. She asked
him how he thought she paid her feed bills. She told him she would like
to have her house done over but she couldn't afford it. She couldn't even
afford to have the monument restored over her husband's grave. She
asked him if he would like to guess what her insurance amounted to for
the year. Finally she asked him if he thought she was made of money and
the old man suddenly let out a great ugly bellow as if this were a comical
question.
 When the visit was over, she felt let down, though she had clearly
triumphed over him. She made up her mind now that on the first of the
month, she would give the Displaced Person his thirty days' notice and
she told Mr. Shortley so.
 Mr. Shortley didn't say anything. His wife had been the only woman
he was ever acquainted with who was never scared off from doing what
she said. She said the Pole had been sent by the devil and the priest. Mr. 
Shortley had no doubt that the priest had got some peculiar control over
Mrs. McIntyre and that before long she would start attending his Masses.
She looked as if something was wearing her down from the inside. She
was thinner and more fidgety and not as sharp as she used to be. She
would look at a milk can now and not see how dirty it was and he had
seen her lips move when she was not talking. The Pole never did anything
the wrong way but all the same he was very irritating to her. Mr. Shortley
himself did things as he pleased -- not always her way -- but she didn't
seem to notice. She had noticed though that the Pole and all his family
were getting fat; she pointed out to Mr. Shortley that the hollows had
come out of their cheeks and that they saved every cent they made.
"Yes'm, and one of these days he'll be able to buy and sell you out," Mr.
Shortley had ventured to say, and he could tell that the statement had
shaken her.
 "I'm just waiting for the first," she had said.
 Mr. Shortley waited too and the first came and went and she didn't
fire him. He could have told anybody how it would be. He was not a
violent man but he hated to see a woman done in by a foreigner. He felt
that that was one thing a man couldn't stand by and see happen.
 There was no reason Mrs. McIntyre should not fire Mr. Guizac at 
once but she put it off from day to day. She was worried about her bills
and about her health. She didn't sleep at night or when she did she
dreamed about the Displaced Person. She had never discharged any one
before; they had all left her. One night she dreamed that Mr. Guizac and
his family were moving into her house and that she was moving in with
Mr. Shortley. This was too much for her and she woke up and didn't sleep
again for several nights; and one night she dreamed that the priest came
to call and droned on and on, saying, "Dear lady, I know your tender heart
won't suffer you to turn the porrrrr man out. Think of the thousands of
them, think of the ovens and the boxcars and the camps and the sick
children and Christ Our Lord."
 "He's extra and he's upset the balance around here," she said, "and I'm
a logical practical woman and there are no ovens here and no camps and
no Christ Our Lord and when he leaves, he'll make more money. He'll
work at the mill and buy a car and don't talk to me -- all they want is a
car."
 "The ovens and the boxcars and the sick children," droned the priest,
"and our dear Lord."
 "Just one too many," she said.
 The next morning, she made up her mind while she was eating her 
breakfast that she would give him his notice at once, and she stood up and
walked out of the kitchen and down the road with her table napkin still in
her hand. Mr. Guizac was spraying the barn, standing in his sway-backed
way with one hand on his hip. He turned off the hose and gave her an
impatient kind of attention as if she were interfering with his work. She
had not thought of what she would say to him, she had merely come. She
stood in the barn door, looking severely at the wet spotless floor and the
dripping stanchions. "Ya goot?" he said.
 "Mr. Guizac," she said, "I can barely meet my obligations now." Then
she said in a louder, stronger voice, emphasizing each word, "I have bills
to pay."
 "I too," Mr. Guizac said. "Much bills, little money," and he shrugged.
 At the other end of the barn, she saw a long beak-nosed shadow glide
like a snake halfway up the sunlit open door and stop; and somewhere
behind her, she was aware of a silence where the sound of the Negroes
shoveling had come a minute before. "This is my place," she said angrily.
"All of you are extra. Each and every one of you are extra!"
 "Ya," Mr. Guizac said and turned on the hose again.
 She wiped her mouth with the napkin she had in her hand and walked
off, as if she had accomplished what she came for. 
 Mr. Shortley's shadow withdrew from the door and he leaned against
the side of the barn and lit half of a cigarette that he took out of his pocket.
There was nothing for him to do now but wait on the hand of God to
strike, but he knew one thing: he was not going to wait with his mouth
shut.
 Starting that morning, he began to complain and to state his side of
the case to every person he saw, black or white. He complained in the
grocery store and at the courthouse and on the street corner and directly
to Mrs. McIntyre herself, for there was nothing underhanded about him.
If the Pole could have understood what he had to say, he would have said
it to him too. "All men was created free and equal," he said to Mrs.
McIntyre, "and I risked my life and limb to prove it. Gone over there and
fought and bled and died and come back on over here and find out who's
got my job -- just exactly who I been fighting. It was a hand-grenade
come that near to killing me and I seen who throwed it -- little man with
eye-glasses just like his. Might have bought them at the same store. Small
world," and he gave a bitter little laugh. Since he didn't have Mrs.
Shortley to do the talking any more, he had started doing it himself and
had found that he had a gift for it. He had the power of making other
people see his logic. He talked a good deal to the Negroes. 
 "Whyn't you go back to Africa?" he asked Sulk one morning as they
were cleaning out the silo. "That's your country, ain't it?"
 "I ain't goin there," the boy said. "They might eat me up."
 "Well, if you behave yourself it isn't any reason you can't stay here,"
Mr. Shortley said kindly. "Because you didn't run away from nowhere.
Your granddaddy was brought. He didn't have a thing to do with coming.
It's the people that run away from where they come from that I ain't got
any use for."
 "I never felt no need to travel," the Negro said.
 "Well," Mr. Shortley said, "if I was going to travel again, it would be
to either China or Africa. You go to either of them two places and you can
tell right away what the difference is between you and them. You go to
these other places and the only way you can tell is if they say something.
And then you can't always tell because about half of them know the
English language. That's where we make out mistake," he said, "-- letting
all them people onto English. There'd be a heap less trouble if everybody
only knew his own language. My wife said knowing two languages was
like having eyes in the back of your head. You couldn't put nothing over
on her."
 "You sho couldn't," the boy muttered, and then he added, "She was 
fine. She was sho fine. I never known a finer white woman than her."
 Mr. Shortley turned in the opposite direction and worked silently for a
while. After a few minutes he leaned up and tapped the colored boy on
the shoulder with the handle of his shovel. For a second he only looked at
him while a great deal of meaning gathered in his wet eyes. Then he said
softly, "Revenge is mine, saith the Lord."
 Mrs. McIntyre found that everybody in town knew Mr. Shortley's
version of her business and that everyone was critical of her conduct. She
began to understand that she had a moral obligation to fire the Pole and
that she was shirking it because she found it hard to do. She could not
stand the increasing guilt any longer and on a cold Saturday morning, she
started off after breakfast to fire him. She walked down to the machine
shed where she heard him cranking up the tractor.
 There was a heavy frost on the ground that made the fields look like
the rough backs of sheep; the sun was almost silver and the woods stuck
up like dry bristles on the sky line. The countryside seemed to be
receding from the little circle of noise around the shed. Mr. Guizac was
squatting on the ground beside the small tractor, putting in a part. Mrs.
McIntyre hoped to get the fields turned over while he still had thirty days
to work for her. The colored boy was standing by with some tools in his 
hand and Mr. Shortley was under the shed about to get up on the large
tractor and back it out. She meant to wait until he and the Negro got out
of the way before she began her unpleasant duty.
 She stood watching Mr. Guizac, stamping her teet on the hard ground,
for the cold was climbing like a paralysis up her feet and legs. She had on
a heavy black coat and a red head-kerchief with her black hat pulled
down on top of it to keep the glare out of her eyes. Under the black brim
her face had an abstracted look and once or twice her lips moved silently.
Mr. Guizac shouted over the noise of the tractor for the Negro to hand
him a screwdriver and when he got it, he turned over on his back on the
icy ground and reached up under the machine. She could not see his face,
only his feet and legs and trunk sticking impudently out from the side of
the tractor. He had on rubber boots that were cracked and splashed with
mud He raised one knee and then lowered it and turned himself slightly.
Of all the things she resented about him, she resented most that he hadn't
left of his own accord.
 Mr. Shortley had got on the large tractor and was backing it out from
under the shed. He seemed to be warmed by it as if its heat and strength
sent impulses up through him that he obeyed instantly. He had headed it
toward the small tractor but he braked it on a slight incline and jumped 
off and turned back toward the shed. Mrs. McIntyre was looking fixedly
at Mr. Guizac's legs lying flat on the ground now. She heard the brake on
the large tractor slip and, looking up, she saw it move forward,
calculating its own path. Later she remembered that she had seen the
Negro jump silently out of the way as if a spring in the earth had released
him and that she had seen Mr. Shortley turn his head with incredible
slowness and stare silently over his shoulder and that she had started to
shout to the Displaced Person but that she had not. She had felt her eyes
and Mr. Shortley's eyes and the Negro's eyes come together in one look
that froze them in collusion forever, and she had heard the little noise the
Pole made as the tractor wheel broke his backbone. The two men ran
forward to help and she fainted.
 She remembered, when she came to, running somewhere, perhaps
into the house and out again but she could not remember what for or if
she had fainted again when she got there. When she finally came back to
where the tractors were, the ambulance had arrived. Mr. Guizac's body
was covered with the bent bodies of his wife and two children and by a
black one which hung over him, murmuring words she didn't understand.
At first she thought this must be the doctor but then with a feeling of
annoyance she recognized the priest, who had come with the ambulance 
and was slipping something into the crushed man's mouth. After a minute
he stood up and she looked first at his bloody pants legs and then at his
face which was not averted from her but was as withdrawn and
expressionless as the rest of the countryside. She only stared at him for
she was too shocked by her experience to be quite herself. Her mind was
not taking hold of all that was happening. She felt she was in some
foreign country where the people bent over the body were natives, and
she watched like a stranger while the dead man was carried away in the
ambulance.
 That evening Mr. Shortley left without notice to look for a new
position and the Negro, Sulk, was taken with a sudden desire to see more
of the world and set off for the southern part of the state. The old man
Astor could not work without company. Mrs. McIntyre hardly noticed
that she had no help left for she came down with a nervous affliction and
had to go to the hospital. When she came back, she saw that the place
would be too much for her to run now and she turned her cows over to a
professional auctioneer (who sold them at a loss) and retired to live on
what she had, while she tried to save her declining health. A numbness
developed in one of her legs and her hands and head began to jiggle and
eventually she had to stay in bed all the time with only a colored woman 
to wait on her. Her eyesight grew steadily worse and she lost her voice
altogether. Not many people remembered to come out to the country to
see her except the old priest. He came regularly once a week with a bag
of breadcrumbs and, after he had fed these to the peacock, he would come
in and sit by the side of her bed and explain the doctrines of the Church. 