Not so long ago, I decided to spend a few days in the West Indies. I was to go there for a short
holiday. Friends had told me it was marvellous. I would laze around all day, they said, sunning myself on
the silver beaches and swimming in the warmgreen sea.
I chose Jamaica, and flew direct fromLondon to Kingston. The drive fromKingston airport to my
hotel on the north shore took two hours. The island was full of mountains and the mountains were covered
all over with dark tangled forests. The big Jamaican who drove the taxi told me that up in those forests
lived whole communities of diabolical people who still practised voodoo and witch-doctory and other
magic rites. "Don't ever go up into those mountain forests," he said, rolling his eyes. "There's things
happening up there that'd make your hair turn white in a minute!"
"What sort of things?" I asked him.
"It's better you don't ask," he said. "It don't pay even to talk about it." And that was all he would
say on the subject.
My hotel lay upon the edge of a pearly beach, and the setting was even more beautiful than I had
imagined. But the moment I walked in through those big open front doors, I began to feel uneasy. There
was no reason for this. I couldn't see anything wrong. But the feeling was there and I couldn't shake it off.
There was some thing weird and sinister about the place. Despite all the loveliness and the luxury, there
was a whiff of danger that hung and drifted in the air like poisonous gas.
And I wasn't sure it was just the hotel. The whole island, the mountains and the forests, the black
rocks along the coastline and the trees cascading with brilliant scarlet flowers, all these and many other
things made me feel uncomfortable in my skin. There was something malignant crouching underneath the
surface of this island. I could sense it in my bones.
My roomin the hotel had a little balcony, and fromthere I could step straight down on to the
beach. There were tall coconut palms growing all around, and every so often an enormous green nut the
size of a football would fall out of the sky and drop with a thud on the sand. It was considered foolish to
linger underneath a coconut palmbecause if one of those things landed on your head, it would smash your
skull.
The Jamaican girl who came in to tidy my roomtold me that a wealthy American called Mr
Wasserman had met his end in precisely this manner only two months before.
"You're joking," I said to her.
"Not joking!" she cried. "No suh! I sees it happening with my very own eyes!"
"But wasn't there a terrific fuss about it?" I asked.
"They hush it up," she answered darkly. "The hotel folks hush it up and so do the newspaper folks
because things like that are very bad for the tourist business."
"And you say you actually saw it happen?"
"I actually saw it happen," she said. "Mr Wasserman, he's standing right under that very tree over
there on the beach. He's got his camera out and he's pointing it at the sunset. It's a red sunset that evening,
and very pretty. Then all at once, down comes a big green nut right smack on to the top of his bald head.
Wham! And that," she added with a touch of relish, "is the very last sunset Mr Wasserman ever did see."
"You mean it killed himinstantly?"
"I don't know about instantly," she said. "I remember the next thing that happens is the camera
falls out of his hands on to the sand. Then his arms drop down to his sides and hang there. Then he starts
swaying. He sways backwards and forwards several times ever so gentle, and I'mstanding there watching
him, and I says to myself the poor man's gone all dizzy and maybe he's going to faint any moment. Then
very very slowly he keels right over and down he goes."
"Was he dead?"
"Dead as a doornail," she said.
"Good heavens."
"That's right," she said. "It never pays to be standing under a coconut palmwhen there's a breeze
blowing."
"Thank you," I said. "I'll remember that."
On the evening of my second day, I was sitting on my little balcony with a book on my lap and a
tall glass of rumpunch in my hand. I wasn't reading the book. I was watching a small green lizard stalking
another small green lizard on the balcony floor about six feet away. The stalking lizard was coming up on
the other one frombehind, moving forward very slowly and very cautiously, and when he came within
reach, he flicked out a long tongue and touched the other one's tail. The other one jumped round, and the
two of themfaced each other, motionless, glued to the floor, crouching, staring and very tense. Then
suddenly, they started do ing a funny little hopping dance together. They hopped up in the air. They
hopped backwards. They hopped forwards. They hopped sideways. They circled one another like two
boxers, hopping and prancing and dancing all the time. It was a queer thing to watch, and I guessed it was
some sort of a courtship ritual they were going through. I kept very still, waiting to see what was going to
happen next.
But I never saw what happened next because at that moment I became aware of a great commotion
on the beach below. I glanced over and saw a crowd of people clustering around something at the water's
edge. There was a narrow canoe-type fisherman's boat pulled up on the sand nearby, and all I could think
of was that the fisherman had come in with a lot of fish and that the crowd was looking at it.
A haul of fish is something that has always fascinated me. I put my book aside and stood up. More
people were trooping down fromthe hotel veranda and hurrying over the beach to join the crowd on the
edge of the water. The men were wearing those frightful Bermuda shorts that came down to the knees, and
their shirts were bilious with pinks and oranges and every other clashing colour you could think of. The
women had better taste, and were dressed for the most part in pretty cotton dresses. Nearly everyone
carried a drink in one hand.
I picked up my own drink and stepped down fromthe balcony on to the beach. I made a little
detour around the coconut palmunder which Mr Wasserman had sup posedly met his end, and strode
across the beautiful silvery sand to join the crowd.
But it wasn't a haul of fish they were staring at. It was a turtle, an upside-down turtle lying on its
back in the sand. But what a turtle it was! It was a giant, a mammoth. I had not thought it possible for a
turtle to be as enormous as this. How can I describe its size? Had it been the right way up, I think a tall
man could have sat on its back without his feet touching the ground. It was perhaps five feet long and four
feet across, with a high domed shell of great beauty.
The fisherman who had caught it had tipped it on to its back to stop it fromgetting away. There
was also a thick rope tied around the middle of its shell, and one proud fisherman, slimand black and
naked except for a small loincloth, stood a short way off holding the end of the rope with both hands.
Upside down it lay, this magnificent creature, with its four thick flippers waving frantically in the
air, and its long wrinkled neck stretching far out of its shell. The flippers had large sharp claws on them.
"Stand back, ladies and gentlemen, please!" cried the fisherman. "Stand well back! Themclaws is
dangerous, man! They'll rip your armclear away fromyour body!"
The crowd of hotel guests was thrilled and delighted by this spectacle. A dozen cameras were out
and click ing away. Many of the women were squealing with pleasure clutching on to the arms of their
men, and the men were demonstrating their lack of fear and their masculinity by making foolish remarks in
loud voices.
"Make yourself a nice pair of horn-rimmed spectacles out of that shell, hey Al?"
"Darn thing must weigh over a ton!"
"You mean to say it can actually float?"
"Sure it floats. Powerful swimmer, too. Pull a boat easy."
"He's a snapper, is he?"
"That's no snapper. Snapper turtles don't grow as big as that. But I'll tell you what. He'll snap your
hand off quick enough if you get too close to him."
"Is that true?" one of the women asked the fisherman. "Would he snap off a person's hand?"
"He would right now," the fisherman said, smiling with brilliant white teeth. "He won't ever hurt
you when he's in the ocean, but you catch himand pull himashore and tip himup like this, then man alive,
you'd better watch out! He'll snap at anything that comes in reach!"
"I guess I'd get a bit snappish myself," the woman said, "if I was in his situation."
One idiotic man had found a plank of driftwood on the sand, and he was carrying it towards the
turtle. It was a fair-sized plank, about five feet long and maybe an inch thick. He started poking one end of
it at the turtle's head.
"I wouldn't do that," the fisherman said. "You'll only make himmadder than ever."
When the end of the plank touched the turtle's neck, the great head whipped round and the mouth
opened wide and snap, it took the plank in its mouth and bit through it as if it were made of cheese.
"Wow!" they shouted. "Did you see that! I'mglad it wasn't my arm!"
"Leave himalone," the fisherman said. "It don't help to get himall stirred up."
A paunchy man with wide hips and very short legs came up to the fisherman and said, "Listen,
feller. I want that shell. I'll buy it fromyou." And to his plump wife, he said, "You know what I'mgoing to
do, Mildred? I'mgoing to take that shell home and have it polished up by an expert. Then I'mgoing to
place it smack in the centre of our living-room! Won't that be something?"
"Fantastic," the plump wife said. "Go ahead and buy it, baby."
"Don't worry," he said. "It's mine already." And to the fisherman, he said, "How much for the
shell?"
"I already sold him," the fisherman said. "I sold himshell and all."
"Not so fast, feller," the paunchy man said. "I'll bid you higher. Come on. What'd he offer you?"
"No can do," the fisherman said. "I already sold him."
"Who to?" the paunchy man said.
"To the manager."
"What manager?"
"The manager of the hotel."
"Did you hear that?" shouted another man. "He's sold it to the manager of our hotel! And you know
what that means? It means turtle soup, that's what it means!"
"Right you are! And turtle steak! You ever have a turtle steak, Bill?"
"I never have, Jack. But I can't wait."
"A turtle steak's better than a beefsteak if you cook it light. It's more tender and it's got one heck of
a flavour."
"Listen," the paunchy man said to the fisherman. "I'mnot trying to buy the meat. The manager can
have the meat. He can have everything that's inside including the teeth and toenails. All I want is the
shell."
"And if I know you, baby," his wife, said, beaming at him, "you're going to get the shell."
I stood there listening to the conversation of these human beings. They were discussing the
destruction, the consumption and the flavour of a creature who seemed, even when upside down, to be
extraordinarily dignified. One thing was certain. He was senior to any of themin age. For probably one
hundred and fifty years he had been cruising in the green waters of the West Indies. He was there when
George Washington was President of the United States and Napoleon was being clobbered at Waterloo.
He would have been a small turtle then, but he was most certainly there.
And now he was here, upside down on the beach, waiting to be sacrificed for soup and steak. He
was clearly alarmed by all the noise and the shouting around him. His old wrinkled neck was straining out
of its shell, and the great head was twisting this way and that as though searching for someone who would
ex plain the reason for all this ill-treatment.
"How are you going to get himup to the hotel?" the paunchy man asked.
"Drag himup the beach with the rope," the fisherman answered. "The staff'll be coming along soon
to take him. It's going to need ten men, all pulling at once."
"Hey, listen!" cried a muscular young man, "Why don't we drag himup?" The muscular young man
was wearing magenta and pea-green Bermuda shorts and no shirt. He had an exceptionally hairy chest,
and the absence of a shirt was obviously a calculated touch. "What say we do a little work for our
supper?" he cried, rippling his muscles. "Come on, fellers! Who's for some exercise?"
"Great idea!" they shouted. "Splendid scheme!"
The men handed their drinks to the women and rushed to catch hold of the rope. They ranged
them selves along it as though for a tug of war, and the hairy-chested man appointed himself anchor-man
and captain of the team.
"Come on, now, fellers!" he shouted. "When I say heave, then all heave at once, you understand?"
The fisherman didn't like this much. "It's better you leave this job for the hotel," he said.
"Rubbish!" shouted hairy-chest. "Heave, boys, heave!"
They all heaved. The gigantic turtle wobbled on its back and nearly toppled over.
"Don't tip him!" yelled the fisherman. "You're going to tip himover if you do that! And if once he
gets back on to his legs again, he'll escape for sure!"
"Cool it, laddie," said hairy-chest in a patronizing voice. "How can he escape? We've got a rope
round him, haven't we?"
"The old turtle will drag the whole lot of you away with himif you give hima chance!" cried the
fisherman. "He'll drag you out into the ocean, every one of you!"
"Heave!" shouted hairy-chest, ignoring the fisherman. "Heave, boys, heave!"
And now the gigantic turtle began very slowly to slide up the beach towards the hotel, towards the
kitchen, towards the place where the big knives were kept. The womenfolk and the older, fatter, less
athletic men fol lowed alongside, shouting encouragement.
"Heave!" shouted the hairy-chested anchor-man. "Put your backs into it, fellers! You can pull
harder than that!"
Suddenly, I heard screams. Everyone heard them. They were screams so high-pitched, so shrill
and so urgent they cut right through everything. "No-o-o-o-o!" screamed the scream. "No! No! No! No!
No!"
The crowd froze. The tug-of-war men stopped tugging and the onlookers stopped shouting and
every single person present turned towards the place where the screams were coming from.
Half walking, half running down the beach fromthe hotel I saw three people, a man, a woman and
a small boy. They were half running because the boy was pull ing the man along. The man had the boy by
the wrist, trying to slow himdown, but the boy kept pulling. At the same time, he was jumping and
twisting and wriggling and trying to free himself fromthe father's grip. It was the boy who was screaming.
"Don't!" he screamed. "Don't do it! Let himgo! Please let himgo!"
The woman, his mother, was trying to catch hold of the boy's other armto help restrain him, but
the boy was jumping about so much, she didn't succeed.
"Let himgo!" screamed the boy. "It's horrible what you're doing! Please let himgo!"
"Stop that, David!" the mother said, still trying to catch his other arm. "Don't be so childish!
You're making a perfect fool of yourself."
"Daddy!" the boy screamed. "Daddy! Tell themto let himgo!"
"I can't do that, David," the father said. "It isn't any of our business."
The tug-of-war pullers remained motionless, still hold ing the rope with the gigantic turtle on the
end of it. Everyone stood silent and surprised, staring at the boy. They were all a bit off-balance now.
They had the slightly hangdog air of people who had been caught doing something that was not entirely
honourable.
"Come on now, David," the father said, pulling against the boy. "Let's go back to the hotel and
leave these people alone."
"I'mnot going back!" the boy shouted. "I don't want to go back! I want themto let it go!"
"Now, David," the mother said.
"Beat it, kid," the hairy-chested man told the boy.
"You're horrible and cruel!" the boy shouted. "All of you are horrible and cruel!" He threw the
words high and shrill at the forty or fifty adults standing there on the beach, and nobody, not even the
hairy-chested man, answered himthis time. "Why don't you put himback in the sea?" the boy shouted. "He
hasn't done anything to you! Let himgo!"
The father was embarrassed by his son, but he was not ashamed of him. "He's crazy about
animals," he said, addressing the crowd. "Back home he's got every kind of animal under the sun. He talks
with them."
"He loves them," the mother said.
Several people began shuffling their feet around in the sand. Here and there in the crowd it was
possible to sense a slight change of mood, a feeling of uneasiness, a touch even of shame. The boy, who
could have been no more than eight or nine years old, had stopped struggling with his father now. The
father still held himby the wrist, but he was no longer restraining him.
"Go on!" the boy called out. "Let himgo! Undo the rope and let himgo!" He stood very small and
erect, facing the crowd, his eyes shining like two stars and the wind blowing in his hair. He was
magnificent.
"There's nothing we can do, David," the father said gently. "Let's go on back."
"No!" the boy cried out. and at that moment he sud denly gave a twist and wrenched his wrist free
fromthe father's grip. He was away like a streak, running across the sand towards the giant upturned
turtle.
"David!" the father yelled, starting after him. "Stop! Come back!"
The boy dodged and swerved through the crowd like a player running with the ball, and the only
person who sprang forward to intercept himwas the fisherman. "Don't you go near that turtle, boy!" he
shouted as he made a lunge for the swiftly running figure. But the boy dodged round himand kept going.
"He'll bite you to pieces!" yelled the fisherman. "Stop, boy! Stop!"
But it was too late to stop himnow, and as he came running straight at the turtle's head, the turtle
saw him, and the huge upside-down head turned quickly to face him.
The voice of the boy's mother, the stricken, agonized wail of the mother's voice rose up into the
evening sky. "David!" it cried "Oh, David!" And a moment later, the boy was throwing himself on to his
knees in the sand and flinging his arms around the wrinkled old neck and hugging the creature to his chest.
The boy's cheek was pressing against the turtle's head, and his lips were moving, whispering soft words
that nobody else could hear. The turtle became absolutely still. Even the giant flippers stopped waving in
the air.
A great sigh, a long soft sigh of relief, went up fromthe crowd. Many people took a pace or two
backward, as though trying perhaps to get a little further away fromsomething that was beyond their
understanding. But the father and mother came forward together and stood about ten feet away fromtheir
son.
"Daddy!" the boy cried out, still caressing the old brown head. "Please do something, Daddy!
Please make themlet himgo!"
"Can I be of any help here?" said a man in a white suit who had just come down fromthe hotel.
This, as everyone knew, was Mr Edwards, the manager. He was a tall, beak-nosed Englishman with a
long pink face. "What an extraordinary thing!" he said, looking at the boy and the turtle. "He's lucky he
hasn't had his head bitten off." And to the boy he said, "You'd better come away fromthere now, sonny.
That thing's dangerous."
"I want themto let himgo!" cried the boy, still cradling the head in his arms. "Tell themto let him
go!"
"You realize he could be killed any moment," the manager said to the boy's father.
"Leave himalone," the father said.
"Rubbish," the manager said. "Go in and grab him. But be quick. And be careful."
"No," the father said.
"What do you mean, no?" said the manager. "These things are lethal! Don't you understand that?"
"Yes," the father said.
"Then for heaven's sake, man, get himaway!" cried the manager. "There's going to be a very nasty
accident if you don't."
"Who owns it?" the father said. "Who owns the turtle?"
"We do," the manager said. "The hotel has bought it."
"Then do me a favour," the father said. "Let me buy it fromyou."
The manager looked at the father, but said nothing.
"You don't know my son," the father said, speaking quietly. "He'll go crazy if it's taken up to the
hotel and slaughtered. He'll become hysterical."
"Just pull himaway," the manager said. "And be quick about it."
"He loves animals," the father said. "He really loves them. He communicates with them."
The crowd was silent, trying to hear what was being said. Nobody moved away. They stood as
though hyp notized.
"If we let it go," the manager said, "they'll only catch it again."
"Perhaps they will," the father said. "But those things can swim."
"I know they can swim," the manager said. "They'll catch himall the same. This is a valuable item,
you must realize that. The shell alone is worth a lot of money."
"I don't care about the cost," the father said. "Don't worry about that. I want to buy it."
The boy was still kneeling in the sand beside the turtle, caressing its head.
The manager took a handkerchief fromhis breast pocket and started wiping his fingers. He was
not keen to let the turtle go. He probably had the dinner menu already planned. On the other hand, he didn't
want another gruesome accident on his private beach this season. Mr Wasserman and the coconut, he told
himself, had been quite enough for one year, thank you very much.
The father said, "I would deemit a great personal favour, Mr Edwards, if you would let me buy it.
And I promise you won't regret it. I'll make quite sure of that."
The manager's eyebrows went up just a fraction of an inch. He had got the point. He was being
offered a bribe. That was a different matter. For a few seconds he went on wiping his hands with the
handkerchief. Then he shrugged his shoulders and said, "Well. I suppose if it will make your boy feel any
better. . ."
"Thank you," the father said.
"Oh. thank you!" the mother cried. "Thank you so very much!"
"Willy," the manager said, beckoning to the fisher man.
The fisherman came forward. He looked thoroughly confused. "I never seen anything like this
before in my whole life," he said. "This old turtle was the fiercest I ever caught! He fought like a devil
when we brought himin! It took all six of us to land him! That boy's crazy!"
"Yes, I know," the manager said. "But now I want you to let himgo."
"Let himgo!" the fisherman cried, aghast. "You mustn't ever let this one go, Mr Edwards! He's
broke the record! He's the biggest turtle ever been caught on this island! Easy the biggest! And what about
our money?"
"You'll get your money."
"I got the other five to pay off as well," the fisher man said, pointing down the beach.
About a hundred yards down, on the water's edge, five black-skinned almost naked men were
standing beside a second boat. "All six of us are in on this, equal shares," the fisherman went on. "I can't
let himgo till we got the money."
"I guarantee you'll get it," the manager said. "Isn't that good enough for you?"
"I'll underwrite that guarantee," the father of the boy said, stepping forward. "And there'll be an
extra bonus for all six of the fishermen just as long as you let himgo at once. I mean immediately, this
instant."
The fisherman looked at the father. Then he looked at the manager. "Okay," he said. "If that's the
way you want it."
"There's one condition," the father said. "Before you get your money, you must promise you won't
go straight out and try to catch himagain. Not this even ing, anyway. Is that understood?"
"Sure," the fisherman said. "That's a deal." He turned and ran down the beach, calling to the other
five fisher men. He shouted something to themthat we couldn't hear, and in a minute or two, all six of
themcame back together. Five of themwere carrying long thick wooden poles.
The boy was still kneeling beside the turtle's head. "David," the father said to himgently. "It's all
right now, David. They're going to let himgo."
The boy looked round, but he didn't take his arms fromaround the turtle's neck, and he didn't get
up. "When?" he asked.
"Now," the father said. "Right now. So you'd better come away."
"You promise?" the boy said,
"Yes, David, I promise."
The boy withdrew his arms. He got to his feet. He stepped back a few paces.
"Stand back everyone!" shouted the fisherman called Willy. "Stand right back everybody, please!"
The crowd moved a few yards up the beach. The tug-of-war men let go the rope and moved back
with the others.
Willy got down on his hands and knees and crept very cautiously up to one side of the turtle. Then
he began untying the knot in the rope. He kept well out of the range of the big flippers as he did this.
When the knot was untied, Willy crawled back. Then the five other fishermen stepped forward
with their poles. The poles were about seven feet long and immensely thick. They wedged them
underneath the shell of the turtle and began to rock the great creature fromside to side on its shell. The
shell had a high dome and was well shaped for rocking.
"Up and down!" sang the fishermen as they rocked away. "Up and down! Up and down! Up and
down!" The old turtle became thoroughly upset, and who could blame it? The big flippers lashed the air
frantically, and the head kept shooting in and out of the shell.
"Roll himover!" sang the fishermen. "Up and over! Roll himover! One more time and over he
goes!"
The turtle tilted high up on to its side and crashed down in the sand the right way up.
But it didn't walk away at once. The huge brown head came out and peered cautiously around.
"Go, turtle, go!" the small boy called out. "Go back to the sea!"
The two hooded black eyes of the turtle peered up at the boy. The eyes were bright and lively, full
of the wisdomof great age. The boy looked back at the turtle, and this time when he spoke, his voice was
soft and intimate. "Good-bye, old man," he said. "Go far away this time." The black eyes remained resting
on the boy for a few seconds more. Nobody moved. Then, with great dignity, the massive beast turned
away and began waddling towards the edge of the ocean. He didn't hurry. He moved sedately over the
sandy beach, the big shell rocking gently fromside to side as he went.
The crowd watched in silence.
He entered the water.
He kept going.
Soon he was swimming. He was in his element now. He swamgracefully and very fast, with the
head held high. The sea was calm, and he made little waves that fanned out behind himon both sides, like
the waves of a boat. It was several minutes before we lost sight of him, and by then he was half-way to
the horizon.
The guests began wandering back towards the hotel. They were curiously subdued. There was no
joking or bantering now, no laughing. Something had happened. Something strange had come fluttering
across the beach.
I walked back to my small balcony and sat down with a cigarette. I had an uneasy feeling that this
was not the end of the affair.
The next morning at eight o'clock, the Jamaican girl, the one who had told me about Mr
Wasserman and the coconut, brought a glass of orange juice to my room.
"Big big fuss in the hotel this morning," she said as she placed the glass on the table and drew
back the curtains. "Everyone flying about all over the place like they was crazy."
"Why? What's happened?"
"That little boy in number twelve, he's vanished. He disappeared in the night."
"You mean the turtle boy?"
"That's him," she said. "His parents is raising the roof and the manager's going mad."
"How long's he been missing?"
"About two hours ago his father found his bed empty. But he could've gone any time in the night I
reckon."
"Yes," I said. "He could."
"Everybody in the hotel searching high and low," she said. "And a police car just arrived."
"Maybe he just got up early and went for a climb on the rocks," I said.
Her large dark haunted-looking eyes rested a moment on my face, then travelled away. "I do not
think so," she said, and out she went.
I slipped on some clothes and hurried down to the beach. On the beach itself, two native
policemen in khaki uniforms were standing with Mr Edwards, the manager. Mr Edwards was doing the
talking. The police men were listening patiently. In the distance, at both ends of the beach, I could see
small groups of people, hotel servants as well as hotel guests, spreading out and heading for the rocks.
The morning was beautiful. The sky was smoke blue, faintly glazed with yellow. The sun was up and
making diamonds all over the smooth sea. And Mr Edwards was talking loudly to the two native
policemen, and waving his arms.
I wanted to help. What should I do? Which way should I go? It would be pointless simply to
follow the others. So I just kept walking towards Mr Edwards.
About then, I saw the fishing-boat. The long wooden canoe with a single mast and a flapping
brown sail was still some way out to sea, but it was heading for the beach. The two natives aboard, one at
either end, were paddling hard. They were paddling very hard. The paddles rose and fell at such a terrific
speed they might have been in a race. I stopped and watched them. Why the great rush to reach the shore?
Quite obviously they had something to tell. I kept my eyes on the boat. Over to my left, I could hear Mr
Edwards saying to the two policemen, "It is perfectly ridiculous. I can't have people disappearing just
like that fromthe hotel. You'd better find himfast, you understand me? He's either wandered off
somewhere and got lost or he's been kidnapped. Either way, it's the responsibility of the police. . ."
The fishing-boat skimmed over the sea and came glid ing up on to the sand at the water's edge.
Both men dropped their paddles and jumped out. They started running up the beach. I recognized the one
in front as Willy. When he caught sight of the manager and the two policemen, he made straight for them.
"Hey, Mr Edwards!" Willy called out. "We just seen a crazy thing!"
The manager stiffened and jerked back his neck. The two policemen remained impassive. They
were used to excitable people. They met themevery day.
Willy stopped in front of the group, his chest heaving in and out with heavy breathing. The other
fisherman was close behind him. They were both naked except for a tiny loincloth, their black skins
shining with sweat.
"We been paddling full speed for a long way," Willy said, excusing his out-of-breathness. "We
thought we ought to come back and tell it as quick as we can."
"Tell what?" the manager said. "What did you see?"
"It was crazy, man! Absolutely crazy!"
"Get on with it, Willy, for heaven's sake."
"You won't believe it," Willy said. "There ain't nobody going to believe it. Isn't that right, Tom?"
"That's right," the other fisherman said, nodding vigor ously. "If Willy here hadn't been with me to
prove it, I wouldn't have believed it myself!"
"Believed what?" Mr Edwards said. "Just tell us what you saw."
"We'd gone off early," Willy said, "about four o'clock this morning, and we must've been a couple
of miles out before it got light enough to see anything properly. Sud denly, as the sun comes up, we see
right ahead of us, not more'n fifty yards away, we see something we couldn't believe not even with our
eyes. . ."
"What?" snapped Mr Edwards. "For heaven's sake get on!"
"We sees that old monster turtle swimming away out there, the one on the beach yesterday, and we
sees the boy sitting high up on the turtle's back and riding himover the sea like a horse!"
"You gotta believe it!" the other fisherman cried. "I sees it too, so you gotta believe it!"
Mr Edwards looked at the two policemen. The two policemen looked at the fishermen. "You
wouldn't be having us on, would you?" one of the policemen said.
"I swear it!" cried Willy. "It's the gospel truth! There's this little boy riding high up on the old
turtle's back and his feet isn't even touching the water! He's dry as a bone and sitting there comfy and easy
as could be! So we go after them. Of course we go after them. At first we try creeping up on themvery
quietly, like we always do when we're catching a turtle, but the boy sees us. We aren't very far away at
this time, you understand. No more than fromhere to the edge of the water. And when the boy sees us, he
sort of leans for ward as if he's saying something to that old turtle, and the turtle's head comes up and he
starts swimming like the clappers of hell! Man, could that turtle go! Tomand me can paddle pretty quick
when we want to, but we've no chance against that monster! No chance at all! He's going at least twice as
fast as we are! Easy twice as fast, what you say, Tom?"
"I'd say he's going three times as fast," Tomsaid. "And I'll tell you why. In about ten or fifteen
minutes, they're a mile ahead of us."
"Why on earth didn't you call out to the boy?" the manager asked. "Why didn't you speak to him
earlier on, when you were closer?"
"We never stop calling out, man!" Willy cried. "As soon as the boy sees us and we're not trying to
creep up on themany longer, then we start yelling. We yell everything under the sun at that boy to try and
get himaboard. 'Hey, boy!' I yell at him. 'You come on back with us! We'll give you a lift home! That ain't
no good what you're doing there, boy! Jump off and swimwhile you got the chance and we'll pick you up!
Go on boy, jump! Your mammy must be waiting for you at home, boy, so why don't you come on in with
us?' And once I shouted at him, 'Listen, boy! We're gonna make you a promise! We promise not to catch
that old turtle if you come with us!'"
"Did he answer you at all?" the manager asked.
"He never even looks round!" Willy said. "He sits high up on that shell and he's sort of rocking
backwards and forwards with his body just like he's urging the old turtle to go faster and faster! You're
gonna lose that little boy, Mr Edwards, unless someone gets out there real quick and grabs himaway!"
The manager's normally pink face had turned white as paper. "Which way were they heading?" he
asked sharply.
"North," Willy answered. "Almost due north."
"Right!" the manager said. "We'll take the speed-boat. I want you with us, Willy. And you, Tom."
The manager, the two policemen and the two fisher men ran down to where the boat that was used
for water-skiing lay beached on the sand. They pushed the boat out, and even the manager lent a hand,
wading up to his knees in his well-pressed white trousers. Then they all climbed in.
I watched themgo zooming off.
Two hours later, I watched themcoming back. They had seen nothing.
All through that day, speed-boats and yachts fromother hotels along the coast searched the ocean.
In the afternoon, the boy's father hired a helicopter. He rode in it himself and they were up there three
hours. They found no trace of the turtle or the boy.
For a week, the search went on, but with no result.
And now, nearly a year has gone by since it happened. In that time, there has been only one
significant bit of news. A party of Americans, out fromNassau in the Bahamas, were deep-sea fishing off
a large island called Eleuthera. There are literally thousands of coral reefs and small uninhabited islands
in this area, and upon one of these tiny islands, the captain of the yacht saw through his binoculars the
figure of a small person. There was a sandy beach on the island, and the small person was walking on the
beach. The binoculars were passed around, and everyone who looked through themagreed that it was a
child of some sort. There was, of course, a lot of excitement on board and the fishing lines were quickly
reeled in. The captain steered the yacht straight for the island. When they were half a mile off, they were
able, through the binoculars, to see clearly that the figure on the beach was a boy, and although sunburnt,
he was almost certainly white-skinned, not a native. At that point, the watchers on the yacht also spotted
what looked like a giant turtle on the sand near the boy. What happened next happened very quickly. The
boy, who had probably caught sight of the approaching yacht, jumped on the turtle's back and the huge
creature entered the water and swamat great speed around the island and out of sight. The yacht searched
for two hours, but nothing more was seen either of the boy or the turtle.
There is no reason to disbelieve this report. There were five people on the yacht. Four of them
were Americans and the captain was a Bahamian fromNassau. All of themin turn saw the boy and the
turtle through the binoculars.
To reach Eleuthera Island fromJamaica by sea, one must first travel north-east for two hundred
and fifty miles and pass through the Windward Passage between Cuba and Haiti. Then one must go northnorth-west for a further three hundred miles at least. This is a total distance of five hundred and fifty
miles, which is a very long journey for a small boy to make on the shell of a giant turtle.
Who knows what to think of all this?
One day, perhaps, he will come back, though I per sonally doubt it. I have a feeling he's quite
happy where he is.
