T he notice informed them that it was a 
temporary matter: for five days their electricity 
would be cut off for one hour, beginning at eight 
P.M .A line had gone down in the last snowstorm, and 
the repairmen were going to take advantage of the 
milder evenings to set it right. The work would affect 
only the houses on the quiet tree-lined street, within 
walking distance of a row of brick-faced stores and a 
trolley stop, where Shoba and Shukumar had lived for 
three years. 

"It's good of them to warn us," Shoba conceded after 
reading the notice aloud, more for her own benefit than 
Shukumar's. She let the strap of her leather satchel, 
plump with files, slip from her shoulders, and left it in 
the hallway as she walked into the kitchen. She wore a 
navy blue poplin raincoat over gray sweatpants and 
white sneakers, looking, at thirty-three, like the type of 
woman she'd once cl aimed she would never resemble. 

She'd come from the gym. H er cranberry lipstick was 
visible only on the outer reaches of her mouth, and her 
eyeliner had left charcoal patches beneath her lower 
lashes. She used to look this way sometimes, Shukumar 
thought, on mornings after a party or a night at a bar, 
when she'd been too lazy to wash her face, too eager to 


INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8D 2 


collapse into his arms. She dropped a sheaf of mail on 
the table without a glance. Her eyes were still fixed on 
the notice in her other hand. "But they should do this 
sort of thing during the day." 

"When I'm here, you mean," Shukumar said. He put 
a glass lid on a pot of lamb, adjusting it so only the 
slightest bit of steam could escape. Since January he'd 
been working at home, trying to complete the final 
chapters of his dissertation on agrarian revolts in India. 
"When do the repai rs start?" 

"It says March nineteenth. Is today the nineteenth?" 
Shoba walked over to the framed corkboard that hung 
on the wall by the fridge, bare except for a calendar of 
William Morris wallpaper patterns. She looked at it as if 
for the first time, studying the wallpaper pattern 
carefully on the top half before allowing her eyes to fall 
to the numbered grid on the bottom. A friend had sent 
the calendar in the mail as a Christmas gift, even though 
Shoba and Shukumar hadn't celebrated Christmas that 
year. 

"Today then," Shoba announced. "You have a dentist 
appointment next Friday, by theway." 

He ran his tongue over the tops of his teeth; he'd 
forgotten to brush them that morning. It wasn't the first 
time. He hadn't left the house at all that day, or the day 
before. The more Shoba stayed out, the more she began 
putting in extra hours at work and taking on additional 
projects, the more he wanted to stay i n, not even leavi ng 
to get the mail, or to buy fruit or wine at the stores by the 
trolley stop. 

Six months ago, in September, Shukumar was at an 
academic conference in Baltimorewhen Shoba went into 
labor, three weeks before her due date. He hadn't 



A TEMPORARY MATTER K> 3 


wanted to go to the conference, but she had insisted; it 
was important to make contacts, and he would be 
entering the job market next year. She told him that she 
had his number at the hotel, and a copy of his schedule 
and flight numbers, and she had arranged with her 
friend Gil Man for a ride to the hospital in the event of an 
emergency. When the cab pulled away that morning for 
the airport, Shoba stood waving good-bye in her robe, 
with one arm resting on the mound of her belly as if it 
were a perfectly natural part of her body. 

Each time he thought of that moment, the last 
moment he saw Shoba pregnant, it was the cab he 
remembered most, a station wagon, painted red with 
blue lettering. It was cavernous compared to their own 
car. Although Shukumar wassixfeettall, with handstoo 
big ever to rest comfortably in the pockets of his jeans, 
he felt dwarfed in the back seat. As the cab sped down 
Beacon Street, he imagined a day when he and Shoba 
might need to buy a station wagon of their own, to cart 
their children back and forth from music lessons and 
dentist appointments. He imagined himself gripping the 
wheel, as Shoba turned around to hand the children 
juice boxes. Once, these images of parenthood had 
troubled Shukumar, adding to his anxiety that he was 
still a student at thirty-five. But that early autumn 
morning, the trees still heavy with bronze leaves, he 
welcomed the image for the first time. 

A member of the staff had found him somehow 
among the identical convention rooms and handed him 
a stiff square of stationery. It was only a telephone 
number, but Shukumar knew it was the hospital. When 
he returned to Boston it was over. The baby had been 
born dead. Shoba was lying on a bed, asleep, in a private 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8D 4 


room so small there was barely enough space to stand 
beside her, in a wing of the hospital they hadn't been to 
on the tour for expectant parents. Her placenta had 
weakened and she'd had a cesarean, though not quickly 
enough. The doctor explained that these things happen. 
He smiled in the kindest way it was possibleto smile at 
people known only professionally. Shoba would be back 
on her feet in a few weeks. Therewas nothing to indicate 
thatshewould notbeabletohavechildren inthefuture. 

These days Shoba was always gone by the time 
Shukumar woke up. He would open his eyes and seethe 
long black hairs she shed on her pillow and think of her, 
dressed, sipping her third cup of coffee already, in her 
office downtown, where she searched for typographical 
errors in textbooks and marked them, in a code she had 
once explained to him, with an assortment of colored 
pencils. She would do the same for his dissertation, she 
promised, when it was ready. He envied her the 
specificity of her task, so uni ike the elusive nature of his. 
He was a mediocre student who had a facility for 
absorbing details without curiosity. Until September he 
had been diligent if not dedicated, summarizing 
chapters, outlining arguments on pads of yellow lined 
paper. But now he would lie in their bed until he grew 
bored, gazing at his side of the closet which Shoba 
always left partly open, at the row of the tweed jackets 
and corduroy trousers hewould not haveto choose from 
to teach his classes that semester. After the baby died it 
was too late to withdraw from his teaching duties. But 
hisadviser had arranged things so that he had the spring 
semester to himself. Shukumar was in his sixth year of 
graduate school. "That and the summer should give you 



A TEMPORARY MATTER K> 5 


a good push," his adviser had said. "You should be able 
to wrap things up by next September." 

But nothing was pushing Shukumar. Instead he 
thought of how he and Shoba had become experts at 
avoiding each other in their three-bedroom house, 
spending as much time on separate floors as possible. He 
thought of how he no longer looked forward to 
weekends, when she sat for hours on the sofa with her 
colored pencils and her files, so that he feared that 
putting on a record in his own house might be rude. He 
thought of how long it had been since she looked into 
his eyes and smiled, or whispered his name on those 
rare occasions they still reached for each other's bodies 
before sleeping. 

In the beginning he had believed that it would pass, 
that he and Shoba would get through it all somehow. 
She was only thirty-three. She was strong, on her feet 
again. But it wasn't a consolation. It was often nearly 
lunchtime when Shukumar would finally pull himself 
out of bed and head downstairs to the coffeepot, pouring 
out the extra bit Shoba left for him, along with an empty 
mug, on the countertop. 

Shukumar gathered onion skins in his hands and let 
them d rop i nto the garbage pai I, on top of the ri bbons of 
fat he'd trimmed from the lamb. He ran the water in the 
sink, soaking the knife and the cutting board, and 
rubbed a lemon half along his fingertips to get rid of the 
garlic smell, a trick he'd learned from Shoba. It was 
seven-thirty. Through the window he saw the sky, like 
soft black pitch. Uneven banks of snow still lined the 
sidewalks, though it was warm enough for people to 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8D 6 


walk about without hats or gloves. Nearly three feet had 
fallen in the last storm, so that for a week people had to 
walk single file, in narrow trenches. For a week that was 
Shukumar's excuse for not leaving the house. But now 
the trenches were widening, and water drained steadily 
i nto grates i n the pavement. 

"The lamb won't be done by eight," Shukumar said. 
"Wemay haveto eat in thedark." 

"We can light candles," Shoba suggested. She 
undipped her hair, coiled neatly at her nape during the 
days, and pried the sneakers from her feet without 
untying them. "I'm going to shower before the lights 
go," shesaid, heading for the staircase. "I'll bedown." 

Shukumar moved her satchel and her sneakers to the 
side of the fridge. She wasn't this way before. She used 
to put her coat on a hanger, her sneakers in the closet, 
and she paid bills as soon as they came. But now she 
treated the house as if it were a hotel. The fact that the 
yellow chintz armchair in the living room clashed with 
the blue-and-maroon Turkish carpet no longer bothered 
her. On the enclosed porch at the back of the house, a 
crisp white bag still sat on the wicker chaise, filled with 
lace she had once planned to turn into curtains. 

While Shoba showered, Shukumar went into the 
downstairs bathroom and found a new toothbrush in its 
box beneath the sink. The cheap, stiff bristles hurt his 
gums, and he spit some blood into the basin. The spare 
brush was one of many stored in a metal basket. Shoba 
had bought them once when they were on sale, in the 
event that a visitor decided, at the last minute, to spend 
the night. 

It was typical other. She was the type to prepare for 
surprises, good and bad. If she found a skirt or a purse 



A TEMPORARY MATTER K> 7 


she I iked she bought two. She kept the bonuses from her 
job in a separate bank account in her name. It hadn't 
bothered him. Hisown mother had fallen to pieceswhen 
hisfather died, abandoning the house he grew up in and 
moving back to Calcutta, leaving Shukumar to settle it 
all. He liked that Shoba was different. It astonished him, 
her capacity to think ahead. When she used to do the 
shopping, the pantry was always stocked with extra 
bottles of olive and corn oil, depending on whether they 
werecooking Italian or Indian. Therewereendless boxes 
of pasta in all shapes and colors, zippered sacks of 
basmati rice, whole sides of lambs and goats from the 
M uslim butchers at H aymarket, chopped up and frozen 
in endless plastic bags. Every other Saturday they 
wound through the maze of stalls Shukumar eventually 
knew by heart. He watched in disbelief as she bought 
more food, trailing behind her with canvas bags as she 
pushed through the crowd, arguing under the morning 
sun with boys too young to shave but already missing 
teeth, who twisted up brown paper bags of artichokes, 
plums, gingerroot, and yams, and dropped them on 
their scales, and tossed them to Shoba one by one. She 
didn't mind being jostled, even when shewas pregnant. 
She was tall, and broad-shouldered, with hips that her 
obstetrician assured her were made for childbearing. 
During the drive back home, as the car curved along the 
Charles, they invariably marveled at how much food 
they'd bought. 

It never went to waste. When friends dropped by, 
Shoba would throw together meals that appeared to 
have taken half a day to prepare, from things she had 
frozen and bottled, not cheap things in tins but peppers 
she had marinated herself with rosemary, and chutneys 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES K> 8 


that she cooked on Sundays, stirring boiling pots of 
tomatoes and prunes. Her labeled mason jars lined the 
shelves of the kitchen, in endless sealed pyramids, 
enough, they'd agreed, to last for their grandchildren to 
taste. They'd eaten it all by now. Shukumar had been 
going through their supplies steadily, preparing meals 
for the two of them, measuring out cupfuls of rice, 
defrosting bags of meat day after day. He combed 
through her cookbooks every afternoon, following her 
penciled instructions to use two teaspoons of ground 
coriander seeds instead of one, or red lentils instead of 
yellow. Each of the recipes was dated, telling the first 
time they had eaten the dish together. April 2, 
cauliflower with fennel. January 14, chicken with 
almonds and sultanas. He had no memory of eating 
those meals, and yet there they were, recorded in her 
neat proofreader's hand. Shukumar enjoyed cooking 
now. It was the one thing that madehimfeel productive. 
If it weren't for him, he knew, Shoba would eat a bowl of 
cereal for her dinner. 

Tonight, with no lights, they would have to eat 
together. For months now they'd served themselves 
from the stove, and he'd taken his plate into his study, 
letting the meal grow cold on his desk before shoving it 
into his mouth without pause, while Shoba took her 
plate to the living room and watched game shows, or 
proofread files with her arsenal of colored pencils at 
hand. 

At some point in the evening she visited him. When 
he heard her approach he would put away his novel and 
begin typing sentences. She would rest her hands on his 
shoulders and stare with him into the blue glow of the 
computer screen. "Don't work too hard," she would say 



A TEMPORARY MATTER K> 9 


after a minute or two, and head off to bed. It was the one 
time in the day she sought him out, and yet he'd come to 
dread it. He knew it was something she forced herself to 
do. Shewould look around the walls of the room, which 
they had decorated together last summer with a border 
of marching ducks and rabbits playing trumpets and 
drums. By the end of August there was a cherry crib 
under the window, a white changing table with mint- 
green knobs, and a rocking chair with checkered 
cushions. Shukumar had disassembled it all before 
bringing Shoba back from the hospital, scraping off the 
rabbits and ducks with a spatula. For some reason the 
room did not haunt him the way it haunted Shoba. In 
January, when he stopped working at his carrel in the 
library, he set up his desk there deliberately, partly 
because the room soothed him, and partly because it was 
a pi ace Shoba avoided. 

Shukumar returned to the kitchen and began to open 
drawers. H e tried to locate a candle among the scissors, 
the eggbeaters and whisks, the mortar and pestle she'd 
bought in a bazaar in Calcutta, and used to pound garlic 
cloves and cardamom pods, back when she used to cook. 
He found a flashlight, but no batteries, and a half-empty 
box of birthday candles. Shoba had thrown him a 
surprise birthday party last May. One hundred and 
twenty people had crammed into the house—all the 
friends and the friends of friends they now 
systematically avoided. Bottles of vinho verde had nested 
in a bed of ice in the bathtub. Shoba was in her fifth 
month, drinking ginger alefrom a martini glass. She had 
madea vanilla cream cakewith custard and spun sugar. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 10 


All night she kept Shukumar's long fingers linked with 
hers as they wal ked among the guests at the party. 

Since September their only guest had been Shoba's 
mother. She came from Arizona and stayed with them 
for two months after Shoba returned from the hospital. 
She cooked dinner every night, drove herself to the 
supermarket, washed their clothes, put them away. She 
was a religious woman. She set up a small shrine, a 
framed picture of a lavender-faced goddess and a plate 
of marigold petals, on the bedside table in the guest 
room, and prayed twice a day for healthy grandchildren 
in the future. She was polite to Shukumar without being 
friendly. She folded his sweaters with an expertise she 
had learned from her job in a department store. She 
replaced a missing button on his winter coat and knit 
him a beige and brown scarf, presenting it to him 
without the least bit of ceremony, as if he had only 
dropped it and hadn't noticed. She never talked to him 
about Shoba; once, when he mentioned the baby's death, 
she looked up from her knitting, and said, "But you 
weren't even there." 

It struck him as odd that there were no real candles in 
the house. That Shoba hadn't prepared for such an 
ordinary emergency. He looked now for something to 
put the birthday candles in and settled on the soil of a 
potted ivy that normally sat on the windowsill over the 
sink. Even though the plant was inches from the tap, the 
soil was so dry that he had to water it first before the 
candles would stand straight. He pushed aside the 
things on the kitchen table, the piles of mail, the unread 
library books. He remembered their first meals there, 
when they were so thrilled to be married, to be living 
together in the same house at last, that they would just 



A TEMPORARY MATTER SO 11 


reach for each other foolishly, more eager to make love 
than to eat. H e put down two embroidered place mats, a 
wedding gift from an uncle in Lucknow, and set out the 
plates and wineglasses they usually saved for guests. He 
put the ivy in the middle, the white-edged, star-shaped 
leaves girded by ten little candles. He switched on the 
digital clock radio and tuned itto a jazz station. 

"What's all this?" Shoba said when she came 
downstairs. Her hair was wrapped in a thick white 
towel. She undid the towel and draped it over a chair, 
allowing her hair, damp and dark, to fall across her back. 
As she wal ked absently toward the stove she took out a 
few tangles with her fingers. She wore a clean pair of 
sweatpants, a T-shirt, an old flannel robe. Her stomach 
was flat again, her waist narrow before the flare of her 
hips, the belt of the robe tied in a floppy knot. 

It was nearly eight. Shukumar put the rice on the 
table and the lentils from the night before into the 
microwave oven, punching the numbers on the timer. 

"You made rogan josh," Shoba observed, looking 
through the gl ass I i d at the bri ght papri ka stew. 

Shukumar took out a piece of lamb, pinching it 
quickly between hisfingersso as not to scald himself. He 
prodded a larger piece with a serving spoon to make 
sure the meat slipped easily from the bone. "It's ready," 
he announced. 

The microwave had just beeped when the lights went 
out, and the music disappeared. 

" Perfect ti mi ng," Shoba sai d. 

"All I could find were birthday candles." Helit up the 
ivy, keeping the rest of the candles and a book of 
matches by his plate. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 12 


"It doesn't matter," she said, running a finger along 
the stem of her wineglass. "It looks lovely." 

In the dimness, he knew how she sat, a bit forward in 
her chair, ankles crossed against the lowest rung, left 
elbow on the table. During his search for the candles, 
Shukumar had found a bottle of wine in a crate he had 
thought was empty. He clamped the bottle between his 
knees while he turned in the corkscrew. He worried 
about spilling, and so he picked up the glasses and held 
them close to his lap while he filled them. They served 
themselves, stirring the rice with their forks, squinting as 
they extracted bay leaves and cloves from the stew. 
Every few minutes Shukumar lit a few more birthday 
candles and drove them into the soil of the pot. 

"It's like India," Shoba said, watching him tend his 
makeshift candelabra. "Sometimes the current 
disappears for hours at a stretch. I once had to attend an 
entire rice ceremony in the dark. The baby just cried and 
cried. It must have been so hot." 

Their baby had never cried, Shukumar considered. 
Their baby would never have a rice ceremony, even 
though Shoba had already made the guest list, and 
decided on which of her three brothers she was going to 
ask to feed the child its first taste of solid food, at six 
months if it was a boy, seven if it was a gi rl. 

"Are you hot?" he asked her. He pushed the blazing 
ivy pot to the other end of the table, closer to the piles of 
books and mail, making it even more difficult for them 
to see each other. He was suddenly irritated that he 
couldn't go upstairs and sit in front of the computer. 

"No. It's delicious," she said, tapping her plate with 
her fork. "It really is." 

H e refi 11 ed the w i ne i n her gl ass. She thanked hi m. 



A TEMPORARY MATTER 8D 13 


They weren't I ike this before. Now he had to struggle 
to say something that interested her, something that 
made her look up from her plate, or from her 
proofreading files. Eventually he gave up trying to 
amuse her. H e I earned not to mi nd the si I ences. 

"I remember during power failures at my 
grandmother's house, we all had to say something," 
Shoba continued. H e could barely see her face, but from 
her tone he knew her eyes were narrowed, as if trying to 
focus on a distant object. It was a habit of hers. 

"Like what?" 

"I don't know. A little poem. A joke. A fact about the 
world. For some reason my relatives always wanted me 
to tell them the names of my friends in America. I don't 
know why the information was so interesting to them. 
The last time I saw my aunt she asked after four girls I 
went to elementary school with in Tucson. I barely 
remember them now." 

Shukumar hadn't spent as much time in India as 
Shoba had. His parents, who settled in New Hampshire, 
used to go back without him. Thefirst time he'd gone as 
an infant he'd nearly died of amoebic dysentery. His 
father, a nervous type, was afraid to take him again, in 
case something were to happen, and left him with his 
aunt and uncle in Concord. As a teenager he preferred 
sailing camp or scooping ice cream during the summers 
to going to Calcutta. It wasn't until after his father died, 
in his last year of college, that the country began to 
interest him, and he studied its history from course 
books asif itwereany other subject. Hewished now that 
he had his own childhood story of India. 

"Let's do that," shesaid suddenly. 

"Do what?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 14 


"Say something to each other in the dark." 

"Like what? I don't know any jokes." 

"No, no jokes." She thought for a minute. "How 
about telling each other something we've never told 
before." 

"I used to play this game in high school," Shukumar 
recalled. "When I got drunk." 

"You're thinking of truth or dare. This is different. 
Okay, I'll start." Shetookasip of wine. "The first time I 
was alone in your apartment, I looked in your address 
book to see if you'd written me in. I think we'd known 
each other two weeks." 

"Wherewas I?" 

"You went to answer the telephone in the other room. 
Itwasyour mother, and I figured it would bea long call. 

I wanted to know if you'd promoted me from the 
margi ns of your newspaper." 

"Had I?" 

"No. But I didn't give up on you. Now it's your turn." 

He couldn't think of anything, but Shoba was waiting 
for him to speak. She hadn't appeared so determined in 
months. What was there left to say to her? He thought 
back to their first meeting, four years earlier at a lecture 
hall in Cambridge, where a group of Bengali poets were 
giving a recital. They'd ended up side by side, on folding 
wooden chairs. Shukumar was soon bored; he was 
unableto decipher the literary diction, and couldn't join 
the rest of the audience as they sighed and nodded 
solemnly after certain phrases. Peering at the newspaper 
folded in his lap, he studied the temperatures of cities 
around the world. Ninety-one degrees in Singapore 
yesterday, fifty-one in Stockholm. When he turned his 
head to the left, he saw a woman next to him making a 



A TEMPORARY MATTER SO 15 


grocery list on the back of a folder, and was startled to 
fi nd that she was beautiful. 

"Okay" he said, remembering. "The first time we 
went out to dinner, to the Portuguese place, I forgot to 
tip the waiter. I went back the next morning, found out 
his name, left money with the manager." 

"You went all the way back to Somervillejustto tip a 
waiter?" 

"I took a cab." 

"Why did you forget to tip the waiter?" 

The birthday candles had burned out, but he pictured 
her face clearly in the dark, the wide tilting eyes, the full 
grape-toned lips, the fall at age two from her high chair 
still visible as a comma on her chin. Each day, Shukumar 
noticed, her beauty, which had once overwhelmed him, 
seemed to fade. The cosmetics that had seemed 
superfluous were necessary now, not to improve her but 
to defi ne her somehow. 

"By the end of the meal I had a funny feeling that I 
might marry you," he said, admitting it to himself as 
well as to her for the first time. "It must have distracted 
me." 

The next night Shoba came home earlier than usual. 
There was lamb left over from the evening before, and 
Shukumar heated it up so that they were able to eat by 
seven. He'd gone out that day, through the melting 
snow, and bought a packet of taper candles from the 
corner store, and batteries to fit the flashlight. He had the 
candles ready on the countertop, standing in brass 
holders shaped like lotuses, but they ate under the glow 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 16 


of the copper-shaded ceiling lamp that hung over the 
table. 

When they had finished eating, Shukumar was 
surprised to see that Shoba was stacking her plate on top 
of his, and then carrying them over to the sink. He had 
assumed she would retreat to the living room, behind 
her barricade of files. 

"Don't worry about the dishes," he said, taking them 
from her hands. 

"It seems silly not to," she replied, pouring a drop of 
detergent onto a sponge. "It's nearly eight o'clock." 

His heart quickened. All day Shukumar had looked 
forward to the lights going out. He thought about what 
Shoba had said the night before, about looking in his 
address book. It felt good to remember her as she was 
then, how bold yet nervous she'd been when they first 
met, how hopeful. They stood side by side at the sink, 
their reflections fitting together in the frame of the 
window. It made him shy, the way he felt the first time 
they stood together in a mirror. He couldn't recall the 
last time they'd been photographed. They had stopped 
attending parties, went now here together. Thefilm in his 
camera still contained pictures of Shoba, in the yard, 
when she was pregnant. 

After finishing the dishes, they leaned against the 
counter, drying their hands on either end of a towel. At 
eight o'clock the house went black. Shukumar lit the 
wicks of the candles, impressed by their long, steady 
flames. 

"Let's sit outside," Shoba said. "I think it's warm 
still." 

They each took a candle and sat down on the steps. It 
seemed strange to be sitting outside with patches of 



A TEMPORARY MATTER SO 17 


snow still on the ground. But everyone was out of their 
houses tonight, the air fresh enough to make people 
restless. Screen doors opened and dosed. A small parade 
of neighbors passed by with flashlights. 

"We're going to the bookstore to browse," a silver- 
haired man called out. He was walking with his wife, a 
thin woman in a windbreaker, and holding a dog on a 
leash. They were the Bradfords, and they had tucked a 
sympathy card into Shoba and Shukumar's mailbox back 
in September. "I hear they've got their power." 

"They'd better," Shukumar said. "Or you'll be 
browsi ng i n the dark." 

The woman laughed, slipping her arm through the 
crook of her husband's elbow. "Want to join us?" 

"No thanks," Shoba and Shukumar called out 
together. It surprised Shukumar that his words matched 
hers. 

He wondered what Shoba would tell him in thedark. 
The worst possibilities had already run through his 
head. That she'd had an affair. That she didn't respect 
him for being thirty-five and still a student. That she 
blamed him for being in Baltimore the way her mother 
did. But he knew those things weren't true. She'd been 
faithful, as had he. She believed in him. It was she who 
had insisted he go to Baltimore. What didn't they know 
about each other? He knew she curled her fingers tightly 
when she slept, that her body twitched during bad 
dreams. He knew it was honeydew she favored over 
cantaloupe. He knew that when they returned from the 
hospital the first thing shedid when shewalked into the 
house was pick out objects of theirs and toss them into a 
pile in the hallway: books from the shelves, plants from 
the windowsills, paintings from walls, photos from 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 18 


tables, pots and pans that hung from the hooks over the 
stove. Shukumar had stepped out of her way, watching 
as she moved methodically from room to room. When 
she was satisfied, she stood there staring at the pile she'd 
made, her lips drawn back in such distaste that 
Shukumar had thought she would spit. Then she'd 
started to cry. 

H e began to feel cold as he sat there on the steps. H e 
felt that he needed her to talk first, in order to 
reciprocate. 

"That time when your mother came to visit us," she 
said finally. "When I said onenightthat I had to stay late 
atwork, I wentoutwith Gillian and had a martini." 

He looked at her profile, the slender nose, the slightly 
masculine set of her jaw. He remembered that night 
well; eating with his mother, tired from teaching two 
classes back to back, wishing Shoba were there to say 
more of the right things because he came up with only 
the wrong ones. It had been twelve years si nee his father 
had died, and his mother had come to spend two weeks 
with him and Shoba, so they could honor his father's 
memory together. Each night his mother cooked 
something his father had liked, but she was too upset to 
eat the dishes herself, and her eyes would well up as 
Shoba stroked her hand. "It's so touching," Shoba had 
said to him at the time. Now he pictured Shoba with 
Gillian, in a bar with striped velvet sofas, the one they 
used to go to after the movies, making sure she got her 
extra olive, asking Gillian for a cigarette. He imagined 
her complaining, and Gillian sympathizing about visits 
fromin-laws. Itwas Gillian who had driven Shoba to the 
hospital. 

"Yourturn," she said, stopping histhoughts. 



A TEMPORARY MATTER SO 19 


At the end of their street Shukumar heard sounds of a 
drill and the electricians shouting over it. He looked at 
the darkened facades of the houses lining the street. 
Candles glowed in the windows of one. In spite of the 
warmth, smoke rose from the chi mney. 

"I cheated on my Oriental Civilization exam in 
college," he said. "It was my last semester, my last set of 
exams. My father had died a few months before. I could 
see the blue book of the guy next to me. He was an 
American guy, a maniac. He knew Urdu and Sanskrit. I 
couldn't remember if the verse we had to identify was 
an example of a ghazal or not. I looked at his answer and 
copied it down." 

It had happened over fifteen years ago. He felt relief 
now, having told her. 

She turned to him, looking not at his face, but at his 
shoes — old moccasins he wore as if they were slippers, 
the leather at the back permanently flattened. He 
wondered if it bothered her, what he'd said. She took his 
hand and pressed it. "You didn't have to tell me why 
you did it," she said, moving closer to him. 

They sat together until nine o'clock, when the lights 
came on. They heard some people across the street 
clapping from their porch, and televisions being turned 
on. The Bradfords walked back down the street, eating 
ice-cream cones and waving. Shoba and Shukumar 
waved back. Then they stood up, his hand still in hers, 
and went inside. 

Somehow, without saying anything, it had turned into 
this. Into an exchange of confessions —the little ways 
they'd hurt or disappointed each other, and themselves. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 20 


The following day Shukumar thought for hours about 
what to say to her. He was torn between admitting that 
he once ripped out a photo of a woman in one of the 
fashion magazines she used to subscribe to and carried it 
in his books for a week, or saying that he really hadn't 
lost the sweater-vest she bought him for their third 
wedding anniversary but had exchanged it for cash at 
Filene's, and that he had gotten drunk alone in the 
middle of the day at a hotel bar. For their first 
anniversary, Shoba had cooked a ten-course dinner just 
for him. The vest depressed him. "My wife gave me a 
sweater-vest for our anniversary," he complained to the 
bartender, his head heavy with cognac. "What do you 
expect?" the bartender had replied. "You're married." 

As for the picture of the woman, he didn't know why 
he'd ripped it out. She wasn't as pretty as Shoba. She 
wore a white sequined dress, and had a sullen face and 
lean, mannish legs. Her bare arms were raised, her fists 
around her head, as if she were about to punch herself in 
the ears. It was an advertisement for stockings. Shoba 
had been pregnant at the time, her stomach suddenly 
immense, to the point where Shukumar no longer 
wanted to touch her. The first time he saw the picture he 
was lying in bed next to her, watching her as she read. 
When he noticed the magazine in the recycling pile he 
found the woman and tore out the page as carefully as 
he could. For aboutaweek he allowed himself a glimpse 
each day. He felt an intense desire for the woman, but it 
was a desire that turned to disgust after a minute or two. 
It was the closest he'd come to infidelity. 

He told Shoba about the sweater on the third night, 
the picture on the fourth. She said nothing as he spoke, 
expressed no protest or reproach. She simply listened, 



A TEMPORARY MATTER SO 21 


and then shetook hishand, pressing itas she had before. 
On the third night, she told him that once after a lecture 
they'd attended, she let him speak to the chairman of his 
department without telling him that he had a dab of pate 
on his chin. She'd been irritated with him for some 
reason, and so she'd let him go on and on, about 
securing his fellowship for the following semester, 
without putting a finger to her own chin as a signal. The 
fourth night, she said that she never liked the one poem 
he'd ever published in his life, in a literary magazine in 
Utah. He'd written the poem after meeting Shoba. She 
added that she found the poem sentimental. 

Something happened when the house was dark. They 
were able to talk to each other again. The third night 
after supper they'd sat together on the sofa, and once it 
was dark he began kissing her awkwardly on her 
forehead and her face, and though it was dark he closed 
his eyes, and knew that she did, too. The fourth night 
they walked carefully upstairs, to bed, feeling together 
for the final step with their feet before the landing, and 
making love with a desperation they had forgotten. She 
wept without sound, and whispered his name, and 
traced his eyebrows with her finger in the dark. As he 
made love to her he wondered what he would say to her 
the next night, and whatshewould say, the thought of it 
exciting him. "Hold me," he said, "hold me in your 
arms," By the time the lights came back on downstairs, 
they'd fallen asleep. 

The morning of the fifth night Shukumar found another 
noti ce from the el ectri c company i n the mai I box. The I i ne 
had been repaired ahead of schedule, it said. He was 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 22 


disappointed. He had planned on making shrimp malai 
for Shoba, but when he arrived at the store he didn't feel 
like cooking anymore. It wasn't the same, he thought, 
knowing that the lights wouldn't go out. In the store the 
shrimp looked gray and thin. The coconut milk tin was 
dusty and overpriced. Still, he bought them, along with a 
beeswax candle and two bottles of wine. 

She came home at seven-thirty. "I suppose this is the 
end of our game," he said when he saw her reading the 
notice. 

She looked at him. "You can still light candles if you 
want." She hadn't been to the gym tonight. She wore a 
suit beneath the raincoat. Her makeup had been 
retouched recently. 

When she went upstairs to change, Shukumar poured 
himself some wine and put on a record, a Thelonius 
Monk album he knew sheliked. 

When she came downstairs they ate together. She 
didn't thank him or compliment him. They simply ate in 
a darkened room, in the glow of a beeswax candle. They 
had survived a difficult time. They finished off the 
shrimp. They finished off the first bottle of wine and 
moved on to the second. They sat together until the 
candle had nearly burned away. She shifted in her chair, 
and Shukumar thought that she was about to say 
something. But instead she blew out the candle, stood 
upturned on the light switch, and sat down again. 

"Shouldn't we keep the lights off?" Shukumar asked. 
She set her plate aside and clasped her hands on the 
table. "I want you to see my face when I tell you this," 
she said gently. 

His heart began to pound. The day she told him she 
was pregnant, she had used the very same words, saying 



A TEMPORARY MATTER SO 23 


them in the same gentle way, turning off the basketball 
game he'd been watching on television. He hadn't been 
prepared then. Now he was. 

Only he didn't want her to be pregnant again. He 
didn't want to have to pretend to be happy. 

"I've been looking for an apartment and I've found 
one," she said, narrowing her eyes on something, it 
seemed, behind his left shoulder. It was nobody's fault, 
she continued. They'd been through enough. She needed 
sometime alone. She had money saved up for a security 
deposit. The apartment was on Beacon Hill, so she could 
walk to work. She had signed the lease that night before 
comi ng home. 

She wouldn't look at him, but he stared at her. It was 
obvious that she'd rehearsed the lines. All this time 
she'd been looking for an apartment, testing the water 
pressure, asking a Realtor if heat and hot water were 
included in the rent. It sickened Shukumar, knowing 
that she had spent these past evenings preparing for a 
life without him. He was relieved and yet he was 
sickened. This was what she'd been trying to tell him for 
the past four eveni ngs. This was the poi nt of her game. 

Now it was his turn to speak. There was something 
he'd sworn he would never tell her, and for six months 
he had done his best to block it from his mind. Before the 
ultrasound she had asked the doctor not to tell her the 
sex of their child, and Shukumar had agreed. She had 
wanted it to be a surprise. 

Later, those few times they talked about what had 
happened, she said at least they'd been spared that 
knowledge. In a way she almost took pride in her 
decision, for it enabled her to seek refuge in a mystery. 
H e knew that she assumed it was a mystery for him, too. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 24 


He'd arrived too late from Baltimore— when it was all 
over and she was lying on the hospital bed. But he 
hadn't. He'd arrived early enough to see their baby, and 
to hold him before they cremated him. At first he had 
recoiled at the suggestion, but the doctor said holding 
the baby might help him with the process of grieving. 
Shoba was asleep. The baby had been cleaned off, his 
bu I bous I i ds shut ti ght to the worl d. 

"Our baby was a boy," he said. "His skin was more 
red than brown. He had black hair on his head. He 
weighed almost five pounds. His fingers were curled 
shut, just I ike yours in the night." 

Shoba looked at him now, her face contorted with 
sorrow. He had cheated on a college exam, ripped a 
picture of a woman out of a magazine. He had returned 
a sweater and got drunk in the middle of the day 
instead. These were the things he had told her. He had 
held his son, who had known life only within her, 
against his chest in a darkened room in an unknown 
wing of the hospital. He had held him until a nurse 
knocked and took him away, and he promised himself 
that day that he would never tell Shoba, because he still 
loved her then, and it was the one thing in her life that 
she had wanted to be a surprise. 

Shukumar stood up and stacked his plate on top of 
hers. He carried the plates to the sink, but instead of 
running the tap he looked out the window. Outside the 
evening was still warm, and the Bradfords were walking 
arm in arm. As he watched the couple the room went 
dark, and he spun around. Shoba had turned the lights 
off. She came back to the table and sat down, and after a 
moment Shukumar joined her. They wept together, for 
the things they now knew. 



When M r. Pirzada 
Came to Dine 


I N th e autum n of 1971 a man used to come to 
our house, bearing confections in his pocket and 
hopes of ascertaining the life or death of his family. 
His name was Mr. Pirzada, and he came from Dacca, 
now the capital of Bangladesh, but then a part of 
Pakistan. That year Pakistan was engaged in civil war. 
The eastern frontier, where Dacca was located, was 
fighting for autonomy from the ruling regime in the 
west. In March, Dacca had been invaded, torched and 
shelled by the Pakistani army. Teachers were dragged 
onto streets and shot, women dragged into barracks and 
raped. By the end of the summer, three hundred 
thousand people were said to have died. In Dacca Mr. 
Pirzada had a three-story home, a lectureship in botany 
at the university, a wife of twenty year, and seven 
daughters between the ages of six and sixteen whose 
names all began with the letter A. "Their mother's idea," 
he explained oneday, producing from his wallet a black- 
and-white picture of seven girls at a picnic, their braids 


INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 26 


tied with ribbons, sitting cross-legged in a row, eating 
chicken curry off of banana leaves. "How am I to 
distinguish? Ayesha, Amira, Amina, Aziza, you seethe 
difficulty." 

Each week Mr. Pirzada wrote letters to his wife, and 
sent comic books to each of his seven daughters, but the 
postal system, along with most everything else in Dacca, 
had collapsed, and he had not heard word of them in 
over six months. Mr. Pirzada, meanwhile, was in 
America for the year, for he had been awarded a grant 
from the government of Pakistan to study the foliage of 
New England. In spring and summer he had gathered 
data in Vermont and Maine, and in autumn he moved to 
a university north of Boston, where we lived, to write a 
short book about his discoveries. The grant was a great 
honor, but when converted into dollars it was not 
generous. As a result, Mr. Pirzada lived in a room in a 
graduate dormitory, and did not own a proper stove or a 
television set of his own. And so he came to our house to 
eat dinner and watch the evening news. 

At first I knew nothing of the reason for his visits. I 
was ten years old, and was not surprised that my 
parents, who were from India, and had a number of 
Indian acquaintances at the university, should ask Mr. 
Pirzada to share our meals. It was a small campus, with 
narrow brick walkways and white pillared buildings, 
located on the fringes of what seemed to be an even 
smaller town. The supermarket did not carry mustard 
oil, doctors did not make house calls, neighbors never 
dropped by without an invitation, and of these things, 
every so often, my parents complained. In search of 
compatriots, they used to trai I thei r fi ngers, at the start of 
each new semester, through the columns of the 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE SO 27 


university directory, circling surnames familiar to their 
part of the world. It was in this manner that they 
discovered Mr. Pirzada, and phoned him, and invited 
him to our home. 

I have no memory of his first visit, or of his second or 
his third, but by the end of September I had grown so 
accustomed to Mr. Pirzada's presence in our living room 
that one evening, as I was dropping ice cubes into the 
water pitcher, I asked my mother to hand me a fourth 
glass from a cupboard still out of my reach. She was 
busy at the stove, presiding over a ski I let of fried spinach 
with radishes, and could not hear me because of the 
drone of the exhaust fan and the fierce scrapes of her 
spatula. I turned to my father, who was leaning against 
the refrigerator, eating spiced cashews from a cupped 
fist. 

"What is it, Lilia?" 

"A glass for the Indian man." 

"Mr. Pirzada won't be coming today. More 
importantly, Mr. Pirzada is no longer considered 
Indian," my father announced, brushing salt from the 
cashews out of his trim black beard. "Not since Partition. 
Our country was divided. 1947." 

When I said I thought that was the date of India's 
independence from Britain, my father said, "That too. 
One moment we were free and then we were si iced up," 
he explained, drawing an X with his finger on the 
countertop, "like a pie. Hindus here, Muslims there. 
Dacca no longer belongs to us." He told me that during 
Partition Hindus and Muslims had set fire to each 
other's homes. For many, the i dea of eati ng i n the other's 
company was still unthinkable. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 28 


It made no sense to me. Mr. Pirzada and my parents 
spoke the same language, laughed at the same jokes, 
looked more or less the same. They ate pickled mangoes 
with their meals, ate rice every night for supper with 
their hands. Like my parents, Mr. Pirzada took off his 
shoes before entering a room, chewed fennel seeds after 
meals as a digestive, drank no alcohol, for dessert 
dipped austere biscuits into successive cups of tea. 
Nevertheless my father insisted that I understand the 
difference, and he led me to a map of the world taped to 
the wall over his desk. He seemed concerned that Mr. 
Pirzada might take offense if I accidentally referred to 
him as an Indian, though I could not really imagine Mr. 
Pirzada being offended by much of anything. "Mr. 
Pirzada is Bengali, but he is a Muslim," my father 
informed me. "Therefore he lives in East Pakistan, not 
India." His finger trailed across the Atlantic, through 
Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and finally 
to the sprawling orange diamond that my mother once 
told me resembled a woman wearing a sari with her left 
arm extended. Various cities had been circled with lines 
drawn between them to indicate my parents' travels, 
and the place of their birth, Calcutta, was signified by a 
small silver star. I had been there only once and had no 
memory of the trip. "As you see, Lilia, it is a different 
country, a different color," my father said. Pakistan was 
yellow, not orange. I noticed that there were two distinct 
parts to it, one much larger than the other, separated by 
an expanse of Indian territory; it was as if California and 
Connecticut constituted a nation apart from theU.S. 

My father rapped his knuckles on top of my head. 
"You are, of course, aware of the current situation? 
Aware of East Pakistan's fight for sovereignty?" 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE SO 29 


I nodded, unaware of the situation. 

We returned to the kitchen, where my mother was 
draining a pot of boiled rice into a colander. My father 
opened up the can on the counter and eyed me sharply 
over the frames of his glasses as he ate some more 
cashews. "What exactly do they teach you at school? Do 
you study history? Geography?" 

"Lilia has plenty to learn at school," my mother said. 
"We live here now, she was born here." She seemed 
genuinely proud of the fact, as if it were a reflection of 
my character. In her estimation, I knew, I was assured a 
safelife, an easy life, afineeducation, every opportunity. 

I would never have to eat rationed food, or obey 
curfews, or watch riots from my rooftop, or hide 
neighbors in water tanks to prevent them from being 
shot, as she and my father had. "Imagine having to place 
her in a decent school. Imagine her having to read 
during power failures by the light of kerosene lamps. 
Imagine the pressures, the tutors, the constant exams." 
She ran a hand through her hair, bobbed to a suitable 
length for her part-time job as a bank teller. "How can 
you possibly expect her to know about Partition? Put 
those nuts away." 

"But what does she learn about the world?" My 
father rattled the cashew can in his hand. "What is she 
learning?" 

We learned American history, of course, and 
American geography. That year, and every year, it 
seemed, we began by studying the Revolutionary War. 
We were taken in school buses on field trips to visit 
Plymouth Rock, and to walk the Freedom Trail, and to 
climb to thetop of the Bunker Hill Monument. Wemade 
dioramas out of colored construction paper depicting 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 30 


George Washington crossing the choppy waters of the 
Delaware River, and we made puppets of King George 
wearing white tights and a black bow in his hair. During 
tests we were given blank maps of the thirteen colonies, 
and asked to fill in names, dates, capitals. I could do it 
with my eyes closed. 

The next evening Mr. Pirzada arrived, as usual, at six 
o'clock. Though they were no longer strangers, upon 
first greeting each other, he and my father maintained 
the habit of shaking hands. 

"Comein, sir. Lilia, Mr. Pirzada'scoat, please." 

He stepped into the foyer, impeccably suited and 
scarved, with a silk tie knotted at his collar. Each 
evening he appeared in ensembles of plums, olives, and 
chocolate browns. He was a compact man, and though 
his feet were perpetually splayed, and his belly slightly 
wide, he nevertheless maintained an efficient posture, as 
if balancing in either hand two suitcases of equal weight. 
His ears were insulated by tufts of graying hair that 
seemed to block out the unpleasant traffic of life. He had 
thickly lashed eyes shaded with a trace of camphor, a 
generous mustache that turned up playfully at the ends, 
and a mole shaped like a flattened raisin in the very 
center of his left cheek. On his head he wore a black fez 
made from the wool of Persian lambs, secured by bobby 
pins, without which I was never to see him. Though my 
father always offered to fetch him in our car, M r. Pirzada 
preferred to walk from his dormitory to our 
neighborhood, a distance of about twenty minutes on 
foot, studying trees and shrubs on his way, and when he 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE 8S> 31 


entered our house his knuckles were pink with the 
effects of crisp autumn air. 

"Another refugee, I am afraid, on Indian territory." 

"They are estimating nine million at the last count," 
my father said. 

M r. Pirzada handed me his coat, for it was my job to 
hang it on the rack at the bottom of the stairs. It was 
made of finely checkered gray-and-blue wool, with a 
striped lining and horn buttons, and carried in its weave 
the faint smell of limes. There were no recognizable tags 
inside, only a hand-stitched label with the phrase "Z. 
Sayeed, Suitors" embroidered on it in cursive with 
glossy black thread. On certain days a birch or maple 
leaf was tucked into a pocket. He unlaced his shoes and 
lined them against the baseboard; a golden paste clung 
to the toes and heels, the result of walking through our 
damp, unraked lawn. Relieved of his trappings, he 
grazed my throat with his short, restless fingers, theway 
a person feelsfor solidity behind a wall beforedriving in 
a nail. Then he followed my father to the living room, 
where the television was tuned to the local news. As 
soon as they were seated my mother appeared from the 
kitchen with a plate of mincemeat kebabs with coriander 
chutney. Mr. Pirzada popped one into his mouth. 

"One can only hope," he said, reaching for another, 
"that Dacca's refugees are as heartily fed. Which 
reminds me." He reached into his suit pocket and gave 
me a small plastic egg filled with cinnamon hearts. "For 
the lady of the house," he said with an almost 
imperceptible splay-footed bow. 

"Really, Mr. Pirzada," my mother protested. "Night 
after night. You spoil her." 

"I only spoil children who are incapable of spoiling." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 32 


It was an awkward moment for me, one which I 
awaited in part with dread, in part with delight. I was 
charmed by the presence of Mr. Pirzada's rotund 
elegance, and flattered by the faint theatricality of his 
attentions, yet unsettled by the superb ease of his 
gestures, which made me feel, for an instant, like a 
stranger in my own home. It had become our ritual, and 
for several weeks, before we grew more comfortable 
with one another, it was the only time he spoke to me 
directly. I had no response, offered no comment, 
betrayed no visible reaction to the steady stream of 
honey-filled lozenges, the raspberry truffles, the slender 
rolls of sour pastilles. I could not even thank him, for 
once, when I did, for an especially spectacular 
peppermint lollipop wrapped in a spray of purple 
cellophane, he had demanded, "What is this thank-you? 
The lady at the bank thanks me, the cashier at the shop 
thanks me, the librarian thanks me when I return an 
overdue book, the overseas operator thanks me as she 
tries to connect me to Dacca and fails. If I am buried in 
this country I will be thanked, no doubt, at my funeral." 

It was inappropriate, in my opinion, to consume the 
candy M r. Pirzada gave me in a casual manner. I coveted 
each evening's treasure as I would a jewel, or a coin 
from a buried kingdom, and I would place it in a small 
keepsake box made of carved sandalwood beside my 
bed, in which, long ago in India, my father's mother 
used to store the ground areca nuts she ate after her 
morning bath. It was my only memento of a 
grandmother I had never known, and until Mr. Pirzada 
came to our lives I could find nothing to put inside it. 
Every so often before brushing my teeth and laying out 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE K> 33 


my clothes for school the next day, I opened the lid of 
the box and ate one of his treats. 

That night, like every night, we did not eat at the 
dining table, because it did not provide an unobstructed 
view of the television set. Instead we huddled around 
the coffee table, without conversing, our plates perched 
on the edges of our knees. From the kitchen my mother 
brought forth the succession of dishes: lentils with fried 
onions, green beans with coconut, fish cooked with 
raisins in a yogurt sauce. I followed with the water 
glasses, and the plate of lemon wedges, and the chili 
peppers, purchased on monthly trips to Chinatown and 
stored by the pound in the freezer, which they liked to 
snap open and crush into their food. 

Before eating Mr. Pi rzada always did a curious thing. 
He took out a plain silver watch without a band, which 
he kept in his breast pocket, held it briefly to one of his 
tufted ears, and wound it with three swift flicks of his 
thumb and forefinger. Uni ike the watch on his wrist, the 
pocket watch, he had explained to me, was set to the 
local timein Dacca, eleven hours ahead. For the duration 
of the meal the watch rested on his folded paper napkin 
on the coffee table. H e never seemed to consult it. 

Now that I had learned Mr. Pi rzada was not an 
Indian, I began to study him with extra care, to try to 
figure out what made him different. I decided that the 
pocketwatch was one of those things. When I saw it that 
night, as he wound it and arranged it on the coffee table, 
an uneasiness possessed me; life, I realized, was being 
lived in Dacca first. I imagined Mr. Pirzada's daughters 
ri si ng from si eep, tyi ng ri bbons i n thei r hai r, anti ci pati ng 
breakfast, preparing for school. Our meals, our actions, 
were only a shadow of what had already happened 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 34 


there, a lagging ghost of where Mr. Pirzada really 
belonged. 

At six-thirty, which was when the national news 
began, my father raised the volume and adjusted the 
antennas. Usually I occupied myself with a book, but 
that night my father insisted that I pay attention. On the 
screen I saw tanks rolling through dusty streets, and 
fallen buildings, and forests of unfamiliar trees into 
which East Pakistani refugees had fled, seeking safety 
over the Indian border. I saw boats with fan-shaped sails 
floating on wide coffee-colored rivers, a barricaded 
university, newspaper offices burnt to the ground. I 
turned to look at Mr. Pirzada; the images flashed in 
miniature across his eyes. As he watched he had an 
immovable expression on his face, composed but alert, 
as if someone were giving him directions to an unknown 
destination. 

During the commercial my mother went to the 
kitchen to get more rice, and my father and M r. Pirzada 
deplored the policies of a general named Yahyah Khan. 
They discussed intrigues I did not know, a catastrophe I 
could not comprehend. "See, children your age, what 
they do to survive," my father said as he served me 
another piece of fish. But I could no longer eat. I could 
only steal glances at Mr. Pirzada, sitting beside mein his 
olive green jacket, calmly creating a well in his rice to 
make room for a second helping of lentils. He was not 
my notion of a man burdened by such grave concerns. I 
wondered if the reason he was always so smartly 
dressed was in preparation to endure with dignity 
whatever news assailed him, perhaps even to attend a 
funeral at a moments notice. I wondered, too, what 
would happen if suddenly his seven daughters were to 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE K> 35 


appear on television, smiling and waving and blowing 
kisses to Mr. Pirzada from a balcony. I imagined how 
relieved hewould be. But this never happened. 

That night when I placed the plastic egg filled with 
cinnamon hearts in the box beside my bed, I did not feel 
the ceremonious satisfaction I normally did. I tried not to 
think about Mr. Pirzada, in his lime-scented overcoat, 
connected to the unruly, sweltering world we had 
viewed a few hours ago in our bright, carpeted living 
room. And yet for several moments that was all I could 
think about. My stomach tightened as I worried whether 
his wife and seven daughters were now members of the 
drifting, clamoring crowd that had flashed at intervals 
on the screen. In an effort to banish the image I looked 
around my room, at the yellow canopied bed with 
matching flounced curtains, at framed class pictures 
mounted on white and violet papered walls, at the 
penciled inscriptions by the closet door where my father 
recorded my height on each of my birthdays. But the 
more I tried to distract myself, the more I began to 
convince myself that Mr. Pirzada's family was in all 
likelihood dead. Eventually I took a square of white 
chocolate out of the box, and unwrapped it, and then I 
did something I had never done before. I put the 
chocolate in my mouth, letting it soften until the last 
possible moment, and then as I chewed it slowly, I 
prayed that Mr. Pirzada's family was safe and sound. I 
had never prayed for anything before, had never been 
taught or told to, but I decided, given the circumstances, 
that it was something I should do. That night when I 
went to the bathroom I only pretended to brush my 
teeth, for I feared that I would somehow rinse the prayer 
out as well. I wet the brush and rearranged the tube of 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 36 


paste to prevent my parents from asking any questions, 
and fell asleep with sugar on my tongue. 

No one at school talked about the war followed so 
faithfully in my living room. We continued to study the 
American Revolution, and learned about the injustices of 
taxation without representation, and memorized 
passages from the Declaration of Independence. During 
recess the boys would divide in two groups, chasing 
each other wildly around the swings and seesaws, 
Redcoats against the colonies. In the classroom our 
teacher, Mrs. Kenyon, pointed frequently to a map that 
emerged like a movie screen from the top of the 
chalkboard, charting the route of the Mayflower or 
showing us the location of the Liberty Bell. Each week 
two members of the class gave a report on a particular 
aspect of the Revolution, and so one day I was sent to 
the school library with my friend Dora to learn about the 
surrender at Yorktown. Mrs. Kenyon handed us a slip of 
paper with the names of three books to look up in the 
card catalogue. We found them right away, and sat 
down at a low round table to read and take notes. But I 
could not concentrate. I returned to the blond-wood 
shelves, to a section I had noticed labeled "Asia." I saw 
books about China, India, Indonesia, Korea. Eventually I 
found a book titled Pakistan: A Land and Its People. I sat 
on a footstool and opened the book. The laminated 
jacket crackled in my grip. I began turning the pages, 
filled with photos of rivers and rice fields and men in 
military uniforms. There was a chapter about Dacca, and 
I began to read about its rainfall, and its jute production. 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE K> 37 


I was studying a population chart when Dora appeared 
in the aisle. 

"What are you doing back here? Mrs. Kenyon's in the 
library. She came to check up on us." 

I slammed the book shut, too loudly. Mrs. Kenyon 
emerged, the aroma of her perfume filling up the tiny 
aisle, and lifted the book by the tip of its spine as if it 
were a hair clinging to my sweater. She glanced at the 
cover, then at me. 

"Is this book a part of your report, Lilia?" 

"No, Mrs. Kenyon." 

"Then I see no reason to consult it," she said, 
replacing it in the slim gap on the shelf. "Do you?" 


* * * 


As weeks passed it grew more and more rare to see any 
footage from Dacca on the news. The report came after 
the first set of commercials, sometimes the second. The 
press had been censored, removed, restricted, rerouted. 
Some days, many days, only a death toll was announced, 
prefaced by a reiteration of the general situation. More 
poets were executed, more villages set ablaze. In spite of 
it all, night after night, my parents and Mr. Pirzada 
enjoyed long, leisurely meals. After the television was 
shut off, and the dishes washed and dried, they joked, 
and told stories, and dipped biscuits in their tea. When 
they tired of discussing political matters they discussed, 
instead, the progress of Mr. Pirzada's book about the 
deciduous trees of New England, and my father's 
nomination for tenure, and the peculiar eating habits of 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 38 


my mother's American coworkers at the bank. 
Eventually I was sent upstairs to do my homework, but 
through the carpet I heard them as they drank more tea, 
and listened to cassettes of Kishore Kumar, and played 
Scrabble on the coffee table, laughing and arguing long 
into the night about the spellings of English words. I 
wanted to join them, wanted, above all, to console Mr. 
Pirzada somehow. But apart from eating a piece of 
candy for the sake of his family and praying for their 
safety, there was nothing I could do. They played 
Scrabble until the eleven o'clock news, and then, 
sometime around midnight, Mr. Pirzada walked back to 
his dormitory. For this reason I never saw him leave, but 
each night as I drifted off to sleep I would hear them, 
anticipating the birth of a nation on the other side of the 
world. 

One day in October Mr. Pirzada asked upon arrival, 
"What are these large orange vegetables on people's 
doorsteps? A type of squash?" 

"Pumpkins," my mother replied. "Lilia, remind me to 
pick one up at the supermarket." 

"And the purpose? It indicates what?" 

"You make a jack-o'-lantern," I said, grinning 
ferociously. "Likethis. To scare people away." 

"I see," Mr. Pirzada said, grinning back. "Very 
useful." 

The next day my mother bought a ten-pound 
pumpkin, fat and round, and placed it on the dining 
table. Before supper, while my father and Mr. Pirzada 
were watching the local news, she told me to decorate it 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE K> 39 


with markers, but I wanted to carve it properly like 
others I had noticed in the neighborhood. 

"Yes, let's carve it," Mr. Pirzada agreed, and rose 
from the sofa. "Hang the news tonight." Asking no 
questions, he walked into the kitchen, opened a drawer, 
and returned, bearing a long serrated knife. He glanced 
at me for approval. "Shall I?" 

I nodded. For the first time we all gathered around 
the dining table, my mother, my father, M r. Pirzada, and 
I. While the television aired unattended we covered the 
tabletop with newspapers. Mr. Pirzada draped his jacket 
over the chair behind him, removed a pair of opal cuff 
links, and rolled up the starched sleeves of his shirt. 

"First go around the top, like this," I instructed, 
demonstrating with my index finger. 

He made an initial incision and drew the knife 
around. When he had come full circle he lifted the cap 
by the stem; it loosened effortlessly, and Mr. Pirzada 
leaned over the pumpkin for a moment to inspect and 
inhale its contents. My mother gave him a long metal 
spoon with which he gutted the interior until the last bits 
of string and seeds were gone. My father, meanwhile, 
separated the seeds from the pulp and set them out to 
dry on a cookie sheet, so that we could roast them later 
on. I drew two triangles against the ridged surface for 
the eyes, which Mr. Pirzada dutifully carved, and 
crescents for eyebrows, and another triangle for the nose. 
The mouth was all that remained, and the teeth posed a 
challenge. I hesitated. 

"Smileor frown?" I asked. 

"You choose," Mr. Pirzada said. 

As a compromise I drew a kind of grimace, straight 
across, neither mournful nor friendly. Mr. Pirzada began 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 40 


carving, without the I east bit of intimidation, as if he had 
been carving jack-o'-lanterns his whole life. He had 
nearly finished when the national news began. The 
reporter mentioned Dacca, and we all turned to listen: 
An Indian official announced that unless the world 
helped to relieve the burden of East Pakistani refugees, 
India would have to go to war against Pakistan. The 
reporter's face dripped with sweat as he relayed the 
information. He did not wear a tie or a jacket, dressed 
instead as if he himself were about to take part in the 
battle. He shielded his scorched face as he hollered 
things to the cameraman. The knife slipped from Mr. 
Pirzada's hand and made a gash dipping toward the 
base of the pumpkin. 

"Pleaseforgive me." He raised a hand to one side of 
his face, as if someone had slapped him there. "I am—it 
isterrible. I will buy another. Wewill try again." 

"Not at all, not at all," my father said. He took the 
knife from Mr. Pirzada, and carved around the gash, 
evening it out, dispensing altogether with the teeth I had 
drawn. What resulted was a disproportionately large 
hole the size of a lemon, so that our jack-o'-lantern wore 
an expression of placid astonishment, the eyebrows no 
longer fierce, floating in frozen surprise above a vacant, 
geometric gaze. 

For Halloween I was a witch. Dora, my trick-or-treating 
partner, was a witch too. We wore black capes fashioned 
from dyed pillowcases and conical hats with wide 
cardboard brims. We shaded our faces green with a 
broken eyeshadow that belonged to Dora's mother, and 
my mother gave us two burlap sacks that had once 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE sa 41 


contained basmati rice, for collecting candy. That year 
our parents decided that we were old enough to roam 
the neighborhood unattended. Our plan was to walk 
from my house to Dora's, from where I was to call to say 
I had arrived safely, and then Dora's mother would 
drive me home. My father equipped us with flashlights, 
and I had to wear my watch and synchronize it with his. 
We were to return no later than nineo'clock. 

When Mr. Pirzada arrived that evening he presented 
me with a box of chocolate-covered mints. 

"In here," I told him, and opened up the burlap sack. 
"Trick or treat!" 

"I understand that you don't really need my 
contribution this evening," he said, depositing the box. 
He gazed at my green face, and the hat secured by a 
string under my chin. Gingerly he lifted the hem of the 
cape, under which I was wearing a sweater and a zipped 
fleece jacket. "Will you bewarm enough?" 

I nodded, causing the hat to tip to one side. 

He set it right. "Perhaps it is best to stand still." 

The bottom of our staircase was lined with baskets of 
miniature candy, and when Mr. Pirzada removed his 
shoes he did not place them there as he normally did, 
but inside the closet instead. He began to unbutton his 
coat, and I waited to take it from him, but Dora called 
me from the bathroom to say that she needed my help 
drawing a moleon her chin. When wewerefinally ready 
my mother took a picture of us in front of the fireplace, 
and then I opened the front door to leave. Mr. Pirzada 
and my father, who had not gone into the living room 
yet, hovered in the foyer. Outside it was already dark. 
The air smelled of wet leaves, and our carved jack-o'- 
lantern flickered impressively against the shrubbery by 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 42 


the door. In the distance came the sounds of scampering 
feet, and the howls of the older boys who wore no 
costume at all other than a rubber mask, and the rustling 
apparel of the youngest children, some so young that 
they were carried from door to door in the arms of their 
parents. 

"Don't go into any of the houses you don't know," 
my father warned. 

Mr. Pirzada knit his brows together. "Is there any 
danger?" 

"No, no," my mother assured him. "All the children 
will be out. It's a tradition." 

"Perhaps I should accompany them?" Mr. Pirzada 
suggested. He looked suddenly tired and small, 
standing there in his splayed, stockinged feet, and his 
eyes contained a panic I had never seen before. In spite 
ofthecold I began to sweat inside my pillowcase. 

"Really, Mr. Pirzada," my mother said, "Lilia will be 
perfectly safe with her friend." 

"But if it rains? If they Iose their way?" 

"Don't worry," I said. It was the first time I had 
uttered those words to Mr. Pirzada, two simple words I 
had tried but failed to tell him for weeks, had said only 
in my prayers. It shamed me now that I had said them 
for my own sake. 

He placed one of his stocky fingers on my cheek, then 
pressed it to the back of his own hand, leaving a faint 
green smear. "If the lady insists," he conceded, and 
offered a small bow. 

We left, stumbling slightly in our black pointy thrift- 
store shoes, and when we turned at the end of the 
driveway to wave good-bye, Mr. Pirzada was standing 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE K> 43 


in the frame of the doorway, a short figure between my 
parents, waving back. 

"Why did that man want to come with us?" Dora 
asked. 

"His daughters are missing." As soon as I said it, I 
wished I had not. I felt that my saying it made it true, 
that Mr. Pirzada's daughters really were missing, and 
that he would never see them again. 

"You mean they were kidnapped?" Dora continued. 
"From a park or something?" 

“I didn't mean they were missing. I meant, he misses 
them. They live in a different country, and he hasn't seen 
them in awhile, that's all." 

We went from house to house, walking along 
pathways and pressing doorbells. Some people had 
switched off all their lights for effect, or strung rubber 
bats in their windows. At the McIntyres' a coffin was 
placed i n front of the door, and Mr. M cl ntyre rose from 
it in silence, his face covered with chalk, and deposited a 
fistful of candy corns into our sacks. Several people told 
me that they had never seen an Indian witch before. 
Others performed the transaction without comment. As 
we paved our way with the parallel beams of our 
flashlights we saw eggs cracked in the middle of the 
road, and cars covered with shaving cream, and toilet 
paper garlanding the branches of trees. By the time we 
reached Dora's house our hands were chapped from 
carrying our bulging burlap bags, and our feet were sore 
and swollen. Her mother gave us bandages for our 
blisters and served us warm cider and caramel popcorn. 
She reminded me to call my parents to tell them I had 
arrived safely, and when I did I could hear the television 
in the background. My mother did not seem particularly 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 44 


relieved to hear from me. When I replaced the phone on 
the receiver it occurred to me that the television wasn't 
on at Dora's house at all. Her father was lying on the 
couch, reading a magazine, with a glass of wine on the 
coffee table, and there was saxophone music playing on 
the stereo. 

After Dora and I had sorted through our plunder, and 
counted and sampled and traded until we were satisfied, 
her mother drove me back to my house. I thanked her 
for the ride, and shewaited in the driveway until I made 
it to the door. In the glare of her headlights I saw that 
our pumpkin had been shattered, its thick shell strewn 
in chunks across the grass. I felt the sting of tears in my 
eyes, and a sudden pain in my throat, as if it had been 
stuffed with the sharp tiny pebbles that crunched with 
each step under my aching feet. I opened the door, 
expecting the three of them to be standing in the foyer, 
waiting to receive me, and to grieve for our ruined 
pumpkin, but there was no one. In the living room Mr. 
Pirzada, my father, and mother were sitting side by side 
on the sofa. The television was turned off, and Mr. 
Pirzada had his head in his hands. 

What they heard that evening, and for many evenings 
after that, was that India and Pakistan were drawing 
closer and closer to war. Troops from both sides lined 
the border, and Dacca was insisting on nothing short of 
independence. The war was to be waged on East 
Pakistani soil. The United States was siding with West 
Pakistan, the Soviet Union with India and what was 
soon to be Bangladesh. War was declared officially on 
December 4, and twelve days later, the Pakistani army, 
weakened by having to fight three thousand miles from 
their source of supplies, surrendered in Dacca. All of 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE SO 45 


these facts I know only now, for they are avail able to me 
in any history book, in any library. But then it remained, 
for the most part, a remote mystery with haphazard 
dues. What I remember during those twelve days of the 
war was that my father no longer asked me to watch the 
news with them, and that Mr. Pirzada stopped bringing 
me candy, and that my mother refused to serve anything 
other than boiled eggs with rice for dinner. I remember 
some nights helping my mother spread a sheet and 
blankets on the couch so that Mr. Pirzada could sleep 
there, and high-pitched voices hollering in the middle of 
the night when my parents called our relatives in 
Calcutta to learn more details about the situation. Most 
of all I remember thethree of them operating during that 
time as if they were a single person, sharing a single 
meal, a si ngl e body, a si ngl e si I ence, and a si ngl e fear. 

In January, Mr. Pirzada flew back to his three-story 
home in Dacca, to discover what was left of it. We did 
not see much of him in those final weeks of the year; he 
was busy finishing his manuscript, and we went to 
Philadelphia to spend Christmas with friends of my 
parents. Just as I have no memory of his first visit, I have 
no memory of his last. My father drove him to the 
airport one afternoon while I was at school. For a long 
timewedid not hear from him. Our evenings went on as 
usual, with dinners in front of the news. The only 
difference was that Mr. Pirzada and his extra watch were 
not there to accompany us. According to reports Dacca 
was repairing itself slowly, with a newly formed 
parliamentary government. The new leader, Sheikh 
Mujib Rahman, recently released from prison, asked 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 46 


countries for building materialsto replace more than one 
million houses that had been destroyed in the war. 
Countless refugees returned from India, greeted, we 
learned, by unemployment and the threat of famine. 
Every now and then I studied the map above my father's 
desk and pictured Mr. Pirzada on that small patch of 
yellow, perspiring heavily, I imagined, in one of his 
suits, searching for his family. Of course, the map was 
outdated by then. 

Finally, several months later, we received a card from 
Mr. Pirzada commemorating the Muslim New Year, 
along with a short letter. He was reunited, he wrote, 
with his wife and children. All were well, having 
survived the events of the past year at an estate 
belonging to his wife's grandparents in the mountains of 
Shillong. Hisseven daughters were a bit taller, hewrote, 
but otherwise they were the same, and he still could not 
keep their names in order. At the end of the letter he 
thanked us for our hospitality, adding that although he 
now understood the meaning of the words "thank you" 
they still were not adequate to express his gratitude. To 
celebrate the good news my mother prepared a special 
dinner that evening, and when we sat down to eat at the 
coffee table we toasted our water glasses, but I did not 
feel like celebrating. Though I had not seen him for 
months, it was only then that I felt Mr. Pirzada's 
absence. It was only then, raising my water glass in his 
name, that I knew what it meant to miss someone who 
was so many miles and hours away, just as he had 
missed his wife and daughters for so many months. He 
had no reason to return to us, and my parents predicted, 
correctly, that we would never see him again. Since 
January, each night before bed, I had continued to eat, 



WHEN MR. PIRZADA CAME TO DINE 8S> 47 


for the sake of Mr. Pirzada's family, a piece of candy I 
had saved from Halloween. That night there was no 
need to. Eventually, I threw them away. 



Interpreter of M aladies 


A t th e tea stall Mr. and Mrs. Das bickered 
about who should take Tina to the toilet. 
Eventually Mrs. Das relented when Mr. Das 
pointed out that he had M r. Kapasi watched as M rs. Das 
emerged slowly from his bulky white Ambassador, 
dragging her shaved, largely bare legs across the back 
seat. She did not hold the little girl's hand as they 
wal ked to the rest room. 

They were on their way to see the Sun Temple at 
Konarak. Itwasadry, bright Saturday, the mid-July heat 
tempered by a steady ocean breeze, ideal weather for 
sightseeing. Ordinarily Mr. Kapasi would not have 
stopped so soon along the way, but less than five 
minutes after he'd picked up the family that morning in 
front of Hotel Sandy Villa, the littlegirl had complained. 
The first thing Mr. Kapasi had noticed when he saw Mr. 
and Mrs. Das, standing with their children under the 
portico of the hotel, was that they were very young, 
perhaps not even thirty. In addition to Tina they had two 
boys, Ronny and Bobby, who appeared very close in age 
and had teeth covered in a network of flashing silver 


INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 49 


wires. The family looked Indian but dressed as 
foreigners did, the children in stiff, brightly colored 
clothing and caps with translucent visors. Mr. Kapasi 
was accustomed to foreign tourists; he was assigned to 
them regularly because he could speak English. 
Yesterday he had driven an elderly couple from 
Scotland, both with spotted faces and fluffy white hair so 
thin it exposed their sunburnt scalps. In comparison, the 
tanned, youthful faces of M r. and M rs. Das were all the 
more striking. When he'd introduced himself, Mr. 
Kapasi had pressed his palms together in greeting, but 
Mr. Das squeezed hands like an American so that Mr. 
Kapasi felt it in his elbow. Mrs. Das, for her part, had 
flexed one side of her mouth, smiling dutifully at Mr. 
Kapasi, without displaying any interest in him. 

As they waited at the tea stall, Ronny, who looked 
like the older of the two boys, clambered suddenly out 
of the back seat, i ntrigued by a goat tied to a stake i n the 
ground. 

"Don't touch it," Mr. Das said. He glanced up from 
his paperback tour book, which said "INDIA" in yellow 
letters and looked as if it had been published abroad. His 
voice, somehow tentative and little shrill, sounded as 
though it had not yet settled into maturity. 

"I want to give it a piece of gum," the boy called back 
as he trotted ahead. 

M r. Das stepped out of the car and stretched his legs 
by squatting briefly to the ground. A dean-shaved man, 
he looked exactly a magnified version of Ronny. He had 
a sapphire blue visor, and was dressed in shorts, 
sneakers, and a T-shirt. The camera slung around his 
neck, with an impressive telephoto lens and numerous 
buttons and markings, was the only complicated thing 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 50 


hewore. Hefrowned, watching as Ronny rushed toward 
the goat, but appeared to have no intention of 
intervening. "Bobby, make sure that your brother 
doesn't do anything stupid." 

"I don't feel like it," Bobby said, not moving. He was 
sitting in the front seat beside Mr. Kapasi studying a 
picture of the elephant god taped to the glove 
compartment. 

"No need to worry," Mr. Kapasi said. "They are quite 
tame." Mr. Kapasi was forty-six years old, with receding 
hair that had gone completely silver, but his butterscotch 
complexion and his unlined brow, which he treated in 
spare moments to dabs of I otus-oi I bal m, made it easy to 
imagine what he must have looked I ike at an earlier age. 
He wore gray trousers and a matching jacket-style shirt, 
tapered at the waist, with short sleeves and a large 
pointed collar, made of a thin but durable synthetic 
material. He had specified both the cut and the fabric to 
his tailor — it was his preferred uniform for giving tours 
because it did not get crushed during his long hours 
behind the wheel. Through the windshield he watched 
as Ronny circled around the goat, touched it quickly on 
its side, than trotted back to the car. 

"You left India as a child?" Mr. Kapasi asked when 
M r. Das had settl ed once agai n i nto the passenger seat. 

"Oh, Mina and I were both born in America," Mr. Das 
announced with an air of sudden confidence "Born and 
raised. Our parents live here now, in Assansol. They 
retired. Wevisitthem every coupleyears." Heturned to 
watch as the little girl ran toward the car, the wide 
purple bows of her sundress flopping on her narrow 
brown shoulders. She was holding to her chest a doll 
with yellow hair that looked as if it had been chopped, 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 51 


as a punitive measure, with a pair of dull scissors. "This 
is Tina's first trip to India, isn't it, Tina?" 

"I don't have to go to the bathroom anymore," Tina 
announced. 

"Where's Mina?" Mr. Das asked. 

M r. Kapasi found it strange that M r. Das should refer 
to his wife by her first name when speaking to the little 
girl. Tina pointed to where Mrs. Das was purchasing 
something from one of the shirtless men who worked at 
the tea stall. Mr. Kapasi heard one of the shirtless men 
sing a phrase from a popular Hindi love song as Mrs. 
Das walked back to the car, but she did not appear to 
understand the words of the song, for she did not 
express irritation, or embarrassment, or react in any 
other way lo the man's declarations. 

He observed her. She wore a red-and-white- 
checkered skirt that stopped above her knees, slip-on 
shoes with a square wooden heel, and a close-fitting 
blouse styled like a man's undershirt. The blouse was 
decorated at chest-level with a calico applique in the 
shape of a strawberry. She was a short woman, with 
small hands like paws, her frosty pink fingernails 
painted to match her lips, and was slightly plump in her 
figure. Her hair, shorn only a little longer than her 
husband's, was parted far to one side. She was wearing 
large dark brown sunglasses with a pinkish tint to them, 
and carried a big straw bag, almost as big as her torso, 
shaped like a bowl, with a water bottle poking out of it. 
She walked slowly, carrying some puffed rice tossed 
with peanuts and chili peppers in a large packet made 
from newspapers, M r. Kapasi turned to M r. Das. 

"Wherein America do you live?" 

"New Brunswick. New Jersey." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 52 


"Nextto New York?" 

"Exactly. I teach middleschool there." 

"What subject?" 

"Science. In fact, every year I take my students on a 
trip to the Museum of Natural History in New York 
City. In a way we have a lot in common, you could say, 
you and I. How long have you been a tour guide, Mr. 
Kapasi?" 

"Five years." 

Mrs. Das reached the car. "How long's the trip?" she 
asked, shutti ng the door. 

"Abouttwo and half hours," Mr. Kapasi replied. 

At this Mrs. Das gave an impatient sigh, as if she had 
been traveling her whole life without pause. She fanned 
herself with a folded Bombay film magazine written in 
English. 

"I thought that the Sun Temple is only eighteen miles 
north of Puri," Mr. Das said, tapping on the tour book. 

"The roads to Konarak are poor. Actually, it is a 
distance of fifty-two miles," Mr. Kapasi explained 

M r. Das nodded, readjusting the camera strap where 
it had begun to chafe the back of his neck. 

Beforestarting the ignition, Mr. Kapasi reached back 
to make sure the crankl i ke I ocks on the i nsi de of each of 
the back doors were secured. As soon as the car began to 
move the little girl began to play with the lock on her 
side, clicking it with some effort forward and backward, 
but Mrs. Das said nothing to stop her. She sat a bit 
slouched at one end of the back seat, not offering her 
puffed rice to anyone. Ronny and Tina sat on either side 
of her, both snapping bright green gum. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 53 


"Look," Bobby said as the car began to gather speed. 
He pointed with hi stingers to the tall trees that lined the 
road. "Look" 

"Monkeys!" Ronny shrieked. "Wow!" 

They were seated in groups along the branches, with 
shining black faces, silver bodies, horizontal eyebrows, 
and crested heads. Their long gray tails dangled like a 
series of ropes among the leaves. A few scratched 
themselves with black leathery hands, or swung their 
feet, staring as the car passed. 

"Wecall them thehanuman," Mr. Kapasi said. "They 
are quite common i n the area." 

As soon as he spoke, one of the monkeys leaped into 
the middle of the road, causing Mr. Kapasi to brake 
suddenly. Another bounced onto the hood of the car, 
then sprang away. Mr. Kapasi beeped his horn. The 
children began to get excited, sucking in their breath and 
covering their faces partly with their hands. They had 
never seen monkeys outside of a zoo, Mr. Das explained. 
H e asked M r. Kapasi to stop the car so that he could take 
a picture. 

While Mr. Das adjusted his telephoto lens, Mrs. Das 
reached into her straw bag and pulled out a bottle of 
colorless nail polish, which she proceeded to stroke on 
her index finger. 

The little girl stuck out a hand. "Minetoo. Mommy, 
do mine too." 

"Leave me alone." Mrs. Das said, blowing on her nail 
and turning her body slightly. "You're making me mess 
up." 

"All set," Mr. Das said, replacing the lens cap. 

The car rattled considerably as it raced along the 
dusty road, causing them all to pop up from their seats 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 54 


every now and then, but Mrs. Das continued lo polish 
her nails. Mr. Kapasi eased up on the accelerator, hoping 
to produce a smoother ride. When he reached for the 
gearshift the boy in front accommodated him by 
swinging his hairless knees out of the way. Mr. Kapasi 
noted that this boy was slightly paler than the other 
children. 

"Daddy, why is the driver sitting on the wrong side 
in this car, too?" the boy asked. 

"They all do it here, dummy," Ronnie said. 

"Don't call your brother a dummy," Mr. Das said. He 
turned to Mr. Kapasi. "In America, you know... it 
confuses them." 

"Oh yes, I am well aware," Mr. Kapasi said. As 
delicately as he could, he shifted gears again accelerating 
as he approached a hill intheroad."l see it on Dallas, the 
steering wheels are on the left-hand side." 

"What's Dalias?" Tina asked, banging her now naked 
dol I on the seat behi nd M r. Kapasi. 

"It went off the air," Mr. Das explained. "It's a 
television show." 

They were all like siblings. Mr. Kapasi thought as 
they passed a row of date trees. Mr. and Mrs. Das 
behaved like an older brother and sister, not parents. It 
seemed that they were in charge of the children only for 
the day; it was hard to believe they were regularly 
responsible for anything other than themselves. Mr. Das 
tapped on his lens cap, and his tour book, dragging his 
thumbnail occasionally across die pages so that they 
made a scraping sound. Mrs. Das continued to polish 
her nails. She had still not removed her sunglasses. 
Every now and then Tina renewed her plea that she 
wanted her nails done, too, and so at one point M rs. Das 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 55 


flicked a drop of polish on the little girl's finger before 
depositing bottle back to her straw bag. 

"Isn't this an air-conditioned car?" she asked, still 
blowing on her hand. The window on Tina's side was 
broken and could not be rolled down. 

"Quit complaining," Mr. Das said. "It's not so hot." 

"I told you to get a car with air-conditioning," Mrs. 
Das continued. "Why do you do this, Raj, just to save a 
few stupid rupees. What are you saving us, fifty cents?" 

Their accents sounded just like the ones Mr. Kapasi 
heard on American television programs, though not like 
the ones on Dallas. 

"Doesn't it get tiresome, Mr. Kapasi, showing people 
the same thing every day?" Mr. Das asked, rolling down 
his own window all the way. "Hey, do you mind 
stopping the car. I justwantto get a shot of this guy." 

M r. Kapasi pulled over to the side of the road as M r. 
Das took a picture of a barefoot man, his head wrapped 
in a dirty turban, seated on top of a cart of grain sacks 
pulled by a pair of bullocks. Both the man and the 
bullocks were emaciated. In the back seat Mrs. Das 
gazed out another window, at the sky, where nearly 
transparent clouds passed quickly in front of one 
another. 

"I look forward to it, actually," Mr. Kapasi said as 
they continued on their way. "The Sun Temple is one of 
my favorite places. In that way it is a reward for me. I 
give tours on Fridays and Saturdays only. I have another 
job during the week." 

"Oh? Where?" Mr. Das asked. 

"I work in a doctor's office." 

"You're a doctor?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 56 


"I am not a doctor. I work with one. As an 
interpreter.” 

"What does a doctor need an interpreter for?" 

"He has a number of Gujarati patients. Myfatherwas 
Gujarati, but many people do not speak Gujarati in this 
area, including the doctor. And so the doctor asked me 
toworkin hisoffice, interpreting what the patients say." 

"Interesting, I've never heard of anything like that," 
Mr. Das said. 

Mr. Kapasi shrugged. "It is a job likeany other" 

"But so romantic," Mrs. Das said dreamily, breaking 
her extended silence. She lifted her pinkish brown 
sunglasses and arranged them on top of her head like a 
tiara. For the first time, her eyes met M r. Kapasi's in the 
rearview mirror: pale, a bit smaller, their gaze fixed but 
drowsy. 

Mr. Das craned to look at her. "What's so romantic 
about it?" 

"I don't know. Something." She shrugged, knitting 
her brows together for an instant. "Would you like a 
piece of gum, Mr. Kapasi?" she asked brightly. She 
reached into her straw bag and handed him a small 
square wrapped in green-and-white-striped paper. As 
soon as Mr. Kapasi put the gum in his mouth a thick 
sweetliquid burst onto his tongue. 

"Tell us more about your job. Mr. Kapasi." Mrs. Das 
said. 

"What would you I ike to know, madame?" 

"I don't know," she shrugged, munching on some 
puffed rice and licking the mustard oil from the corners 
of her mouth. "Tell us a typical situation." She settled 
back in her seat, her head tilted in a patch of sun, and 
dosed her eyes. "I want to picture what happens." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 57 


"Very well. The other day a man came in with a pain 
in his throat." 

"Did he smoke cigarettes?" 

"No. It was very curious. He complained that he felt 
as if there were long pieces of straw stuck in his throat. 
When I told the doctor he was able to prescribe the 
proper medication." 

"That's so neat." 

"Yes," Mr. Kapasi agreed after some hesitation. 

"So these patients are totally dependant on you," 
Mrs. Das said. She spoke slowly as if she was thinking 
aloud. "In a way, more dependant on you than the 
doctor." 

"How do you mean? How could it be?" 

"Well, for example, you could tell the doctor that the 
pain fell like a burning, not straw. The patient would 
never know what you had told the doctor, and the 
doctor wouldn't know that you had told the wrong 
thing. It's a big responsibility." 

"Yes, a big responsibility you have there, Mr. 
Kapasi," Mr. Das agreed. 

Mr. Kapasi had never thought of her job in such 
complimentary terms. To him it was a thankless 
occupation. He found nothing noble in interpreting 
people's maladies, assiduously translating the symptoms 
of so many swollen bones, countless cramps of bellies 
and bowels, spots on people's pal ms that changed color, 
shape, or size. The doctor, nearly half his age, had an 
affinity for bell-bottom trousers and made humorless 
jokes about the Congress party. Together they worked in 
a stale little infirmary where Mr. Kapasi's smartly 
tailored clothes clung to him in the heat, in spite of the 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 58 


blackened blades of a ceiling fan churning over their 
heads. 

The job was a sign of his failings. In his youth he'd 
been a devoted scholar of foreign languages, the owner 
of an impressive collection of dictionaries. He had 
dreamed of being an interpreter for diplomats and 
dignitaries, resolving conflicts between people and 
nations, settling disputes of which he alone could 
understand both sides. He was a self-educated man. In a 
series of notebooks, in the evenings before his parents 
settled his marriage, he had listed the common 
etymologies of words, and at one point in his life he was 
confident that he could converse, if given the 
opportunity, in English, French, Russian, Portuguese, 
and Italian, not to mention Hindi, Bengali, Orissi, and 
Gujarati. Now only a handful of European phrases 
remained in his memory, scattered words for things like 
saucers and chairs. English was the only non-Indian 
language he spoke fluently anymore. Mr. Kapasi knew it 
was not a remarkable talent. Sometimes he feared that 
his children knew better English than he did, just from 
watching television. Still, it came in handy for the tours. 

He had taken the job as interpreter after his first son, 
at the age of seven, contracted typhoid — that was how 
he first made acquaintance of the doctor. After the time 
Mr. Kapasi had been teaching English in a grammar 
school, and he bartered his skills as an interpreter to pay 
the increasingly exorbitant medical bills. In the end the 
boy had died one evening in his mother's arms, his limbs 
burning with fever, but then there was the funeral to pay 
for, and the other children who were boon soon enough, 
and the newer, bigger house, and the good schools and 
tutors, and the fine shoes and the television, and the 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 59 


countless other ways he tried to console his wife and to 
keep her from crying in her sleep, and so when the 
doctor offered to pay him twice as much as he earned at 
the grammar school, he accepted. Mr. Kapasi knew that 
his wife had little regard for his career as an interpreter. 
He new it reminded her of the son she'd lost, and that 
she resented the other lives he helped, in his own small 
way, to save. If ever she referred to his position, she used 
the phrase "doctor's assistant," as if the process of 
interpretation were equal to taking someone's 
temperature, or changing a bedpan. She never asked him 
about the patients who came to the doctor's office, or 
said that his job was a big responsibility. 

For this reason it flattered Mr. Kapasi that Mrs. Das 
was so intrigued by his job. Unlike his wife, she had 
reminded him of its intellectual challenges. She had also 
used the word "romantic." She did not behave in a 
romantic way toward her husband, and yet she had used 
the word to describe him. He wondered if Mr. and Mrs. 
Das were a bad match, just as he and his wife were. 
Perhaps they, too, had little in common apart from three 
children and a decade of their lives. The signs he 
recognized from his own marriage were there — the 
bickering, the indifference, the protracted silences. Her 
sudden interest in him, an interest she did not express in 
either her husband or her children, was mildly 
intoxicating. When Mr. Kapasi thought once again about 
how she had said "romantic," the feeling of intoxication 
grew. 

He began to check his reflection in the rearview 
mirror as he drove, feeling grateful that he had chosen 
the gray suit that morning, and not the brown one which 
tended to sag a little in the knees. From time to time he 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 60 


glanced through the mirror at Mrs. Das. In addition to 
glancing at her face he glanced at the strawberry 
between her breasts, and the golden brown hollow in 
her throat. He decided to tell Mrs. Das about another 
patient, and another: the young woman who had 
complained of sensation of raindrops in her spine, the 
gentleman whose birthmark had begun to sprout hairs. 
Mrs. Das listened attentively, stroking her hair with a 
small plastic brush that resembled an oval bed of nails, 
asking more questions, for yet another example. The 
children werequiet, intent on spotting more monkeys in 
the trees and M r. Das was absorbed by his tour book, so 
it seemed like a private conversation between Mr. 
Kapasi and Mrs. Das. In this manner the next half hour 
passed, and when they stopped for lunch at a roadside 
restaurant that sold fritters and omelette sandwiches, 
usually something Mr. Kapasi looked forward to on his 
tours so that he could sit in peace and enjoy some hot 
tea, he was disappointed. As the Das family settled 
together under a magenta umbrella fringed with white 
and orange tassels, and placed their ordered with one of 
the waiters who marched about in tricornered caps, Mr. 
Kapasi reluctantly headed toward the neighboring table. 

"Mr. Kapasi, wait. There's room here," Mrs. Das 
called out. She gathered Tina onto her lap, insisting that 
he accompany them. And so, together, they had bottled 
mango juice and sandwiches and plates of onions and 
potatoes deep-fried in graham flour batter. After 
finishing two omelette sandwiches Mr. Das took more 
pictures of the group as they ate. 

"How much longer," he asked Mr. Kapasi as he 
paused to I oad a new rol I of fi I m i n the camera. 

"About half an hour more." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 61 


By now the children had gotten up from the table to 
look for more monkeys perched in a nearby tree, so there 
was a considerable space between Mrs. Das and Mr. 
Kapasi. Mr. Das placed the camera to his face and 
squeezed one eye shut, his tongue exposed at one corner 
of his mouth. "This looks funny. M ina, you need to lean 
in closer to Mr. Kapasi." 

She did. He could smell a scent on her skin, like a 
mixtureof whiskey and rosewater. Heworried suddenly 
that she could smell his perspiration, which he knew had 
collected beneath the synthetic material of his shirt. He 
polished off his mango juice in one gulp and smoothed 
his silver hair with his hands. A bit of the juice dripped 
ontohischin. Hewondered if Mrs. Das had noticed. 

She had not. "What's your address, Mr. Kapasi?" she 
inquired, fishing for something inside her straw bag. 

"You would I ike my address?" 

"So we can send you copies," she said. "Of the 
pictures." She handed him a scrap of paper which she 
had hastily ripped from a page of her film magazine. 
The blank portion was limited, for the narrow strip was 
crowded by lines of text and a tiny picture of a hero and 
heroi ne embraci ng under a eucalyptus tree. 

The paper curled as Mr. Kapasi wrote his address in 
clear, careful letters. She would write to him, asking 
about his days interpreting at the doctor's office, and he 
would respond eloquently, choosing only the most 
entertaining anecdotes, ones that would make her laugh 
out I oud as she read them i n her house i n N ew J ersey. I n 
time she would reveal the disappointment of her 
marriage, and he his. In this way their friendship would 
grow, and flourish. He would possess a picture of the 
two of them, eating lined onions under a magenta 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 62 


umbrella, which he would keep, he decided, safely 
tucked between the pages of his Russian grammar. As 
his mind raced, Mr. Kapasi experienced a mild and 
pleasant shock. It was similar to a feeling he used to 
experience long ago when, after months of translating 
with the aid of a dictionary, he would finally read a 
passage from a French novel, or an Italian sonnet, and 
understand the words, one after another, unencumbered 
by his own efforts. I n those moments M r. Kapasi used to 
think that all was right with the world, that all struggles 
were rewarded, that all of life's mistakes made sense in 
the end. The promise that he would hear from Mrs. Das 
now filled him with the same belief. 

When he finished writing his address Mr. Kapasi 
handed her the paper, but as soon as he did so he 
worried that he had either misspelled his name, or 
accidentally reversed the numbers of his postal code. H e 
dreaded the possibility of a lost letter, the photograph 
never reaching him, hovering somewhere in Orissa, 
close but ultimately unattainable. He thought of asking 
for the slip of paper again, just to make sure he had 
written his address accurately, but M rs. Das had already 
dropped it into thejumbleof her bag. 

They reached Konarak at two-thirty. The temple, made 
of sandstone, was a massive pyramid-like structure in 
the shape of a chariot. It was dedicated to the great 
master of life, the sun, which struck three sides of the 
edifice as it made its journey each day across the sky. 
Twenty-four giant wheels were carved on the north and 
south sides of the plinth. Thewholething was drawn by 
a team of seven horses, speeding as if through the 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 63 


heavens. As they approached, Mr. Kapasi explained that 
the temple had been built between a . d . 1243 and 1255, 
with the efforts of twelve hundred artisans, by the great 
ruler of the Ganga dynasty, king Narasimhadeva the 
First to commemorate his victory against the Muslim 
army. 

"It says the temple occupies about a hundred and 
seventy acres of land," Mr. Das said reading from his 
book. 

"It's like a dessert," Ronnie said, his eyes wandering 
across the sand that stretched on all sides beyond the 
temple. 

"The Candrabhaga river once flowed one mile north 
of here. It is dry now," Mr. Kapasi said, turning off the 
engine. 

They got out and walked toward the temple, posing 
first for pictures by the pair of lions that flanked the 
steps. M r. Kapasi led them next to one of the wheels of 
the chariot, higher than any human being, nine feet in 
diameter. 

"The wheels are supposed to symbolize the wheel of 
life,'" Mr. Das read. "They depict the cycle of creation, 
preservation, and achievement of realization.' Cool." He 
turned the page of his book. '"Each wheel is divided into 
eight thick and thin spokes, dividing the day into eight 
equal pans. The rims are carved with designs of birds 
and animals, whereas the medallions in the spokes are 
carved with women in luxurious poses, largely erotic in 
nature." 

What he referred to were the countless friezes of 
entwined naked bodies, making love in various 
positions, women dinging to the necks of men, their 
knees wrapped eternally around their lovers' thighs. In 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 64 


addition to these were assorted scenes from daily life, of 
hunting and trading, of deer being killed with bows and 
arrows and marching warriors holding swards in their 
hands. 

It was no longer possible to enter the temple, for it 
had filled with rubble years ago, but they admired the 
exterior, as did all the tourists Mr. Kapasi brought there, 
slowly strolling along each of its sides. Mr. Das trailed 
behind, taking pictures. The children ran ahead, pointing 
to figures of naked people, intrigued in particular by the 
Nagamithunas, the half-human, half-serpentine couples 
who were said, Mr. Kapasi told them, to live in the 
deepest waters of the sea. Mr. Kapasi was pleased that 
they liked the temple, pleased especially that it appealed 
to Mrs. Das. She stopped every three or four paces, 
staring silently at the carved lovers, and the processions 
of elephants, and the topless female musicians bearing 
on two-sided drums. 

Though Mr. Kapasi had been to the temple countless 
times, it occurred him, as he, too, gazed at the topless 
women, that he had never seen his own wife fully 
naked. Even when they had made love she kept the 
panels of her blouse hooked together, the string of her 
petticoat knotted around her waist. He had never 
admired the backs of his wife's legs the way he now 
admired those of Mrs. Das, walking as if for his benefit 
alone. He had, of course, seen plenty of bare limbs 
before, belonging to the American and European ladies 
who took his tours. But Mrs. Das was different. Unlike 
the other women, who had an interest only in the 
temple, and kept their noses buried in a guidebook, or 
their eyes behind the lens of a camera, Mrs. Das had 
taken an interest in him. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 65 


Mr. Kapasi was anxious to be alone with her, to 
continue their private conversation, yet he felt nervous 
to walk at her side. She was lost behind her sunglasses, 
ignoring her husband's requests that she pose for 
another picture, walking past her children as if they 
were strangers. Worried that he might disturb her, Mr. 
Kapasi walked ahead, to admire, as he always did, the 
three life-sized bronze avatars of Surya, the sun god, 
each emerging from its own niche on the temple facade 
to greet the sun at dawn, noon, and evening. They wore 
elaborate headdresses, their languid, elongated eyes 
dosed, their bare chests draped with carved chains and 
amulets. Hibiscus petals, offerings from previous 
visitors, were strewn at their gray-green feet. The last 
statue, on the northern wall of the temple, was Mr. 
Kapasi's favorite. This Surya had a tired expression, 
weary after a hard day of work, sitting astride a horse 
with folded legs. Even his horse's eyes were drowsy. 
Around his body were smaller sculptures of women in 
pairs, their hips thrust to one side. 

"Who's that?" M rs. Das asked. He was startled to see 
that she was standing beside him. 

"He is the Astachala-Surya," Mr. Kapasi said. "The 
setting sun." 

"So in a couple hours the sun will set right here?" she 
slipped a foot out of one of her square-heeled shoes, 
rubbed her toes on the back of her other leg. 

Mr. Kapasi was not certain exactly what the word 
suggested, but he had a feeling it was a favorable 
response. He hoped that Mrs. Das had understood 
Surya's beauty, his power. Perhaps they would discuss it 
further in their letters. He would explain things to her, 
things about India, and shewould explain things to him 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 66 


about America. In its own way this correspondence 
would fulfill his dream, of serving as an interpreter 
between nations. He looked at her straw bag, delighted 
that his address lay nestled among its contents. When he 
pictured her so many thousands of miles away he 
plummeted, so much so that he had an overwhelming 
urge to wrap his arms around her, to freeze with her, 
even for an instant, in an embrace witnessed by his 
favorite Surya. But Mrs. Das had already started 
wal king. 

"When do you return to America?” he asked, trying 
to sound placid. 

"In ten days." 

He calculated: a week to settle in, a week to develop 
the pictures, a few days to compose her letter, two weeks 
to get to India by air. According to his schedule, 
allowing room for delays, he would hear from Mrs. Das 
in approximately six weeks' time. 

The family was silent as Mr. Kapasi drove them back, a 
little past four-thirty, to Hotel Sandy Villa. The children 
had bought miniature granite versions of the chariot's 
wheels at a souvenir stand, and they turned them round 
in their hands. M r. Das continued to read his book. M rs. 
Das untangled Tina's hair with her brush and divided it 
into two little ponytails. 

Mr. Kapasi was beginning to dread the thought of 
dropping them off. He was not prepared to begin his six- 
week wait to hear from M rs. Das. As he stole glances at 
her in the rear-view mirror, wrapping elastic bands 
around Tina's hair, he wondered how he might make 
the tour last a little longer. Ordinarily he sped back to 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 67 


Puri using a shortcut, eager to return home, scrub his 
feet and hands with sandalwood soap, and enjoy the 
evening newspaper and a cup of tea that his wife would 
serve him in silence. The thought of that silence, 
something to which he'd long been resigned, now 
oppressed him. It was then that he suggested visiting the 
hills at Udayagiri and Khandagiri, where a number of 
monastic dwellings were hewn our of the ground, lacing 
one another across a defile. It was some miles away, but 
well worth seeing, Mr. Kapasi told them. 

"Oh yeah, there's something mentioned about it in 
this book," Mr. Das said. "Built by a Jain king or 
something." 

"Shall wegothen?" Mr. Kapasi asked. He paused at a 
turn in theroad. "It'sto the left." 

Mr. Das turned to look at Mrs. Das. Both of them 
shrugged. 

"Left, left," the children chanted. 

Mr. Kapasi turned the wheel, almost delirious with 
relief. He did not know what he would do or say to Mrs. 
Das once they arrived at the hills. Perhaps he would tell 
her what a pleasing smile she had. Perhaps he would 
compliment her strawberry shin, which he found 
irresistibly becoming. Perhaps, when Mr. Das was busy 
taking a picture, hewould takeher hand. 

He did not have to worry. When they got to the hills 
divided by a steep path thick with trees, Mrs. Das 
refused to get out of the car. All along the path, dozens 
of monkeys were seated on stones, as well as on the 
branches of the trees. Their hind legs were stretched out 
in front and raised to shoulder level, their arms resting 
on their knees. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 68 


"My legs are tired," she said, sinking low in her seat. 
"I'll stay here." 

"Why did you have to wear those stupid shoes?" Mr. 
Das said. "You won't be in the pictures." 

"Pretend I'm there." 

"But we could use one of these pictures for our 
Christmas card this year. We didn't get one of all five of 
us at the Sun Temple. Mr. Kapasi could takeit." 

"I'm not coming. Anyway, those monkeys give me 
the creeps." 

"But they're harmless." Mr. Das said. He turned to 
Mr. Kapasi. "Aren'tthey?" 

"They are more hungry than dangerous," M r. Kapasi 
said. "Do not provoke them with food, and they will not 
bother you." 

Mr. Das headed up the defile with the children, the 
boys at his side, the little girl on his shoulders. Mr. 
Kapasi watched as they crossed paths with a Japanese 
man and woman, the only other tourists there, who 
posed for a final photograph, then stepped into a nearby 
car and drove away. As the car disappeared out of view 
some of the monkeys called out, emitting soft whooping 
sounds, and then walked on their flat black hands and 
feet up the path. At one point a group of them formed a 
little ring around Mr. Das and the children. Tina 
screamed in delight. Ronny ran in circles around his 
father. Bobby bent down and picked up a fat stick on the 
ground. When he extended It, one of the monkeys 
approached him and snatched it, then briefly beat the 
ground. 

"I'll join them," Mr. Kapasi said, unlocking the door 
on his side. "There is much to explain about the caves." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 69 


"No. Stay a minute." Mrs. Das said. She got out of the 
back seat and slipped in beside Mr. Kapasi. "Raj has his 
dumb book anyway." Together through the windshield 
Mrs. Das and Mr. Kapasi watched as Bobby and the 
monkey passed the stick back and forth between them. 

"A brave little boy," Mr. Kapasi commented. 

"It's not so surprising," Mrs. Das said. 

"No?" 

"He's not his." 

"I beg your pardon." 

"Raj's. He's not Raj's son." 

Mr. Kapasi felt a prickle on his skin. He reached into 
his shirt pocket for the small tin of lotus-oil balm he 
carried with him at all times, and applied it to three 
spots on his forehead. He knew that Mrs. Das was 
watching him, but hedid not turn to face her. Instead he 
watched as the figures of Mr. Das and the children grew 
smaller, climbing up the steep path, pausing every now 
and then for a picture, surrounded by a growing number 
of monkeys. 

"Are you surprised?" The way she put it made him 
choose his words with care. 

"It's not the type of thing one assumes," M r. Kapasi 
replied slowly. He put the tin of lotus-oil balm back in 
his pocket. 

"No, of course not. And no one knows, of course. No 
one at all. I've kept it a secret for eight whole years." She 
looked at Mr. Kapasi, tilting her chin as if to gain afresh 
perspective. "But now I've told you." 

Mr. Kapasi nodded. He felt suddenly parched, and 
his forehead was warm and slightly numb from the 
balm. He considered asking Mrs. Das for a sip of water, 
then decided against it. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 70 


"We met when we were very young," she said. She 
reached into her straw bag in search of something, then 
pulled out a packet of puffed rice. "Want some?" 

"No, thank you." 

She put a fistful in her mouth, sank into the seat a 
little, and looked away from Mr. Kapasi out the window 
on her sideof the car. "Wemarried when wewerestill in 
college. We were in high school when he proposed. We 
went to the same college, of course. Back then we 
couldn't stand the thought of being separated, not for a 
day, not for a minute. Our parents were best friends who 
lived in the same town. My entire life I saw him every 
weekend, either at our house or theirs. We were sent 
upstairs to play together while our parents joked about 
our marriage. Imagine! They never caught us at 
anything, though in a way I think it was all more or less 
a setup. The things we did those Friday and Saturday 
nights, whileour parents sat downstairs drinking tea... I 
could tell you stories, M r. Kapasi." 

As a result of spending all her time in college with 
Raj, she continued, shedid notmakemany close friends. 
There was no one to confide in about him at the end of a 
difficult day, or to share a passing thought or a worry. 
Her parents now lived on the other side of the world, 
but she had never been very close to them anyway. After 
marrying so young she was overwhelmed by it all, 
having a child so quickly, and nursing, and warming up 
bottles of milk and testing their temperature against her 
wrist while Raj was at work, dressed in sweaters and 
corduroy pants, teaching his students about rocks and 
dinosaurs. Raj never looked cross or harried, or plump 
as she had become after the fi rst baby. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 71 


Always tired, shededined invitations from her one or 
two college girlfriends, to have lunch or shop in 
Manhattan. Eventually the friends stopped calling her, 
so that she was left at home all day with the baby, 
surrounded by toys that made her trip when she walked 
or wince when she sat, always cross and tired. Only 
occasionally did they go out after Ronny was born, and 
even more rarely did they entertain. Raj didn't mind; he 
looked forward to coming home from teaching and 
watching television and bouncing Ronny on his knee. 
She had been outraged when Raj told her that a Punjabi 
friend, someone whom she had once met but did not 
remember, would be staying with them for a week for 
some job interviews in the New Brunswick area. 

Bobby was conceived in the afternoon, on a sofa 
littered with rubber teething toys, after the friend 
learned that London pharmaceutical company had hired 
him, while Ronny cried to be freed from his playpen. She 
made no protest when the friend touched the small of 
her back as she was about to make a pot of coffee, then 
pulled her against his crisp navy suit. He made love to 
her swiftly, in silence, with an expertise she had never 
known, without the meaningful expressions and smiles 
Raj always insisted on afterward. The next day Raj drove 
thefriend toJFK. Hewas married now, to a Punjabi girl, 
and they lived in London still, and every year they 
exchanged Christmas cards with Raj and Mina, each 
couple tucking photos of their families into the 
envelopes. He did not know that hewas Bobby's father. 
He never would. 

"I beg your pardon. Mrs. Das, but why have you told 
me this information?" Mr. Kapasi asked when she had 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 72 


finally finished speaking, and had turned to face him 
once again. 

"For God's sake, stop calling me Mrs. Das. I'm 
twenty-eight. You probably have children my age." 

"Not quite." It disturbed M r. Kapasi to learn that she 
thought of him as a parent. The feeling he had had 
toward her, that had made him check his reflection in 
the rearview mirror as they drove, evaporated a little. 

"I told you because of your talents." She put the 
packet of puffed rice back into her bag without folding 
over the top. 

"I don't understand." Mr. Kapasi said. 

"Don't you see? For eight years I haven't been able to 
express this to anybody, not to friends, certainly not to 
Raj. Fie doesn't even suspect it. Flethinks I'm still in love 
with him. Well, don't you have anything to say?" 

"About what?" 

"About what I've just told you. About my secret, and 
about how terrible it makes me feel. I feel terrible 
looking at my children, and at Raj, always terrible. I 
have terrible urges, Mr. Kapasi, to throw things away. 
One day I had the urge to throw everything I own out 
the window, the television, the children, everything. 
Don't you thi nk it's unhealthy?" 

Fie was silent. 

"Mr. Kapasi, don't you have anything to say? I 
thought that was your job." 

"My job is to give tours, Mrs. Das." 

"Not that. Your other job. Asan interpreter." 

"But we do not face a language barrier. What need is 
therefor an interpreter?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 73 


"That's not what I mean. I would never have told you 
otherwise. Don't you realize what it means for me to tell 
you?" 

"What does it mean?" 

"It means that I'm tired of feeling so terrible all the 
time. Eight years, Mr. Kapasi, I've been in pain eight 
years. I was hoping you could help me feel bdter, say 
the ri ght thi ng. Suggest some ki nd of remedy." 

He looked at her, in her red plaid skirt and 
strawberry T-shirt, a woman not yet thirty, who loved 
neither her husband nor her children, who had already 
fallen out of love with life. Her confession depressed 
him, depressed him all the more when he thought of Mr. 
Dasatthetop of the path, Tina clinging to hisshoulders, 
taking pictures of ancient monastic cells cut into the hills 
to show his students in America, unsuspecting and 
unaware that one of his sons was not his own. Mr. 
Kapasi felt insulted that Mrs. Das should ask him to 
interpret her common, trivial little secret. She did not 
resemble the patients in the doctor's office, those who 
came glassy-eyed and desperate, unable to sleep or 
breathe or urinate with ease, unable, above all, to give 
words to their pains. Still, Mr. Kapasi believed it was his 
duty to assist Mrs. Das. Perhaps he ought to tell her to 
confess the truth to Mr. Das. He would explain that 
honesty was the best policy. Honesty, surely, would help 
her feel better, as she'd put it. Perhaps he would offer to 
presideoverthediscussion, as a mediator. Hedecided to 
begin with the most obvious question, to get to the heart 
of the matter, and so he asked, "Is it really pain you feel, 
Mrs. Das, or is it guilt?" 

She turned to him and glared, mustard oil thick on 
her frosty pink lips. She opened her mouth to say 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 74 


something, but as she glared at Mr. Kapasi some certain 
knowledge seemed to pass before her eyes, and she 
stopped. It crushed him; he knew at that moment that he 
was not even important enough to be properly insulted. 
She opened the car door and began walking up the path, 
wobbling a little on her square wooden heels, reaching 
into her straw bag to eat handfuls of puffed rice. It fell 
through her fingers, leaving a zigzagging trail, causing a 
monkey to leap down from a tree and devour the little 
white grains. In search of more, the monkey began to 
follow Mrs. Das. Others joined him, so that she was soon 
being followed by about half a dozen of them, their 
velvety tails dragging behind. 

Mr. Kapasi stepped out of the car. He wanted to 
holler, to alert her in some way, but he worried that if 
she knew they were behind her, she would grow 
nervous. Perhaps she would lose her balance. Perhaps 
they would pull at her bag or her hair. He began to jog 
up the path, taking a fallen branch in his hand to scare 
away the monkeys. Mrs. Das continued walking, 
oblivious, trailing grains of puffed rice. Near the top of 
the incline, before a group of cells fronted by a row of 
squat stone pillars, Mr. Das was kneeling on the ground, 
focusing the lens of his camera. The children stood 
under the arcade, now hiding, now emerging from view. 

"Waitfor me," Mrs. Das called out. Tmcoming." 

"Great," Mr. Das said without looking up. "Just in 
time. We'll get M r. Kapasi to take a picture of the five of 
us." 

Mr. Kapasi quickened his pace, waving his branch so 
that the monkeys scampered away, distracted, in 
another direction. 

"Where's Bobby?" M rs. Das asked when she stopped. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 75 


Mr. Das looked up from the camera. "I don't know. 
Ronny, where's Bobby?" 

"Where is he?" Mrs. Das repeated sharply. "What's 
wrong with all of you?" 

They began calling his name, wandering up and 
down the path a bit. Because they were calling they did 
not initially hear the boy's screams. When they found 
him, a little farther down the path under a tree, he was 
surrounded by a group of monkeys, over a dozen of 
them, pulling at hisT-shirt with their long black fingers. 
The puffed rice M rs. Das had spilled was scattered at his 
feet, raked over by the monkeys' hands. The boy was 
silent, his body frozen, swift tears running down his 
startled face. His bare legs were dusty and red with 
welts from where one of the monkeys struck him 
repeatedly with the sack he had given to itearlier. 

"Daddy, the monkey's hurting Bobby," Tina said. 

Mr. Das wiped his palms on the front of his shorts. In 
his nervousness he accidentally pressed the shutter on 
his camera; the whirring noise of the advancing film 
excited the monkeys, and the one with the stick began to 
beat Bobby more intently. "What are we supposed to 
do? What if they start attacking?" 

"Mr. Kapasi." Mrs. Das shrieked, noticing him 
standing to one side. "Do something, for God's sake, do 
something!" 

Mr. Kapasi took his branch and shooed them away, 
hissing at the ones that remained, stomping his feet to 
scare them. The animals retreated slowly, with a 
measured gait, obedient but unintimidated. Mr. Kapasi 
gathered Bobby in his arms and brought him back to 
where his parents and siblings were standing. As he 
carried him he was tempted to whisper a secret into the 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 76 


boy's ear. But Bobby was stunned, and shivering with 
fright, his legs bleeding slightly where the stick had 
broken the skin. When Mr. Kapasi delivered him to his 
parents. Mr. Das brushed some dirt off the boy's T-shirt 
and put the visor on him the right way. Mrs. Das 
reached into her straw bag to find a bandage which she 
taped over the cut on his knee. Ronny offered his brother 
afresh piece of gum. "He'sfine. Justa littlescared, right. 
Bobby?" Mr. Das said, parting the top of his head. 

"God, let's get out of here." Mrs. Das said. She folded 
her arms across the strawberry on her chest. "This place 
gives me the creeps." 

"Yeah. Back to the hotel, definitely," Mr. Das agreed. 

"Poor Bobby," Mrs. Das said. "Come here a second. 
Let Mommy fix your hair." Again she reached into her 
straw bag, this time for her hairbrush, and began to run 
it around the edges of the translucent visor. When she 
whipped out the hairbrush, the slip of paper with Mr. 
Kapasi's address on it fluttered away in the wind. No 
one but Mr. Kapasi noticed. He watched as it rose, 
carried higher and higher by the breeze, into the trees 
where the monkeys now sat, solemnly observing the 
scene below. Mr. Kapasi observed it too, knowing that 
this was the picture of the Das family he would preserve 
forever in his mind. 



A Real Durwan 


B oori m a, sweeper of the stairwell, had not slept 
in two nights. So the morning before the third 
night she shook the mites out of her bedding. She 
shook the quilts once underneath the letter boxes where 
she lived, then once again at the mouth of the alley, 
causing the crows who were feeding on vegetable peels 
to scatter in several directions. 

As she started up thefour flights to the roof, Boori M a 
kept one hand placed over the knee that swelled at the 
start of every rainy season. That meant that her bucket, 
quilts, and the bundle of reeds which served as her 
broom all had to be braced under one arm. Lately Boori 
Ma had been thinking that the stairs were getting 
steeper; climbing them felt more like climbing a ladder 
than a staircase. She was sixty-four years old, with hair 
i n a knot no I arger than a wal nut, and she I ooked al most 
as narrow from the front as she did from the side. 

In fact, the only thing that appeared three- 
dimensional about Boori Ma was her voice: brittle with 
sorrows, as tart as curds, and shrill enough to grate meat 
from a coconut. It was with this voice that she 


A REAL DURWAN 8S> 78 


enumerated, twice a day as she swept the stairwell, the 
details of her plight and losses suffered since her 
deportation to Calcutta after Partition. At that time, she 
maintained, the turmoil had separated her from a 
husband, four daughters, a two-story brick house, a 
rosewood almari, and a number of coffer boxes whose 
skeleton keys she still wore, along with her life savings, 
ti ed to the free end of her sari. 

Aside from her hardships, the other thing Boori Ma 
liked to chronicle was easier times. And so, by the time 
she readied the second-floor landing, she had already 
drawn to the whole building's attention the menu of her 
third daughter's wedding night. "We married her to a 
school principal. The rice was cooked in rosewater. The 
mayor was invited. Everybody washed their fingers in 
pewter bowls." Here she paused, evened out her breath, 
and readjusted the supplies under her arm. She took the 
opportunity also to chase a cockroach out of the banister 
poles, then continued: "Mustard prawns were steamed 
in banana leaves. Not a delicacy was spared. Not that 
this was an extravagance for us. At our house, we ate 
goat twice a week. We had a pond on our property, full 
offish." 

By now Boori could see some light from the roof 
spilling into the stairwell. And though it was only eight 
o'clock, the sun was already strong enough to warm the 
last of the cement steps under her feet. It was a very old 
building, the kind with bathwater that still had to be 
stored in drums, windows without glass, and privy 
scaffolds made of bricks. 

"A man came to pick our dates and guavas. Another 
clipped hibiscus. Yes, there I tasted life. Here I eat my 
dinner from a rice pot," At this point in the recital Boori 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 79 


Ma's ears started to burn: a pain chewed through her 
swollen knee. "Have I mentioned that I crossed the 
border with just two bracelets on my wrist? Yet there 
was a day when my feet touched nothing but marble. 
Believe me, don't believe me, such comforts you cannot 
even dream them." 

Whether there was any truth to Boori Ma's litanies no 
one could be sure. For one thing, every day, the 
perimeters of her former estate seemed to double, as did 
the contents of her almari and coffer boxes. No one 
doubted she was a refugee; the accent in her Bengali 
made that cl ear. Sti 11, the resi dents of thi s parti cul ar fl at- 
building could not reconcile Boori Ma's claims to prior 
wealth alongside the more likely account of how she had 
crossed the East Bengal border, with the thousands of 
others, on the back of a truck, between sacks of hemp. 
And yet there were days when Boori Ma insisted that 
she had come to Calcutta on a bullock cart. 

"Which was it, by truck or by cart?" the children 
sometimes asked her on their way to play cops and 
robbers in the alley. To which Boori Ma would reply, 
shaking the free end of her sari so that the skeleton keys 
raided, "Why demand specifics? Why scrape lime from a 
betel leaf? Believe me, don't believe me. My life is 
composed of such griefs you cannot even dream them." 

So she garbled facts. She contradicted herself. She 
embellished almost everything. But her rants were so 
persuasive, her fretting so vivid, that it was not so easy 
to dismiss her. 

What kind of landowner ended up sweeping stairs? 
That was what Mr. Dalai of the third floor always 
wondered as he passed Boori M a on hi s way to and from 
the office, where he filed receipts for a wholesale 



A REAL DURWAN SO 80 


distributor of rubber tubes, pipes, and valve fittings in 
theplumbing district of Col lege Street. 

Bechareh, she probably constructs tales as a way of 
mourning the loss of her family, was the collective 
surmi se of most of the wi ves. 

And "Boori Ma's mouth is full of ashes, but she is the 
victim of changing times" was the refrain of old Mr. 
Chatterjee. He had neither strayed from his balcony nor 
opened a newspaper since independence, but in spite of 
this fact, or maybe because of it, his opinions were 
always highly esteemed. 

The theory eventually circulated that Boori Ma had 
once worked as hired help for a prosperous zamindar 
back east, and was therefore capable of exaggerating her 
past at such elaborate lengths and heights. Her throaty 
impostures hurt no one. All agreed that she was a 
superb entertainer. In exchange for her lodging below 
the letter boxes, Boori Ma kept their crooked stairwell 
spotlessly clean. Most of all, the residents liked that 
Boori Ma, who slept each night behind the collapsible 
gate, stood guard between them and the outside world. 

No one in this particular flat-building owned much 
worth stealing. The second-floor widow, Mrs. Misra, 
was the only one with a telephone. Still, the residents 
were thankful that Boori Ma patrolled activities in the 
alley, screened the itinerant peddlers who came to sell 
combs and shawls from door to door, was able to 
summon a rickshaw at a moment's calling, and could, 
with a few slaps of her broom, rout any suspicious 
character who strayed into the area in order to spit, 
uri nate, or cause some other troubl e. 

In short, over the years, Boori Ma's services came to 
resemble those of a real durwan. Though under normal 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8a 81 


circumstances this was no job for a woman, she honored 
the responsibility, and maintained a vigil no less 
punch Nous than if she were the gatekeeper of a house on 
Lower Circular Road, or Jodhpur Park, or any other 
fancy neighborhood. 

On the rooftop Boori Ma hung her quilts over the 
clothesline. The wire, strung diagonally from one comer 
of the parapet to the other, stretched across her view of 
television antennas, billboards, and the distant arches of 
Howrah Bridge. Boori Ma consulted the horizon on all 
four sides. Then she ran the tap at the base of the cistern. 
She washed her face, rinsed her feet, and rubbed two 
fingers over her teeth. After this she started to beat the 
quilts on each side with her broom. Every now and then 
she stopped and squinted at the cement, hoping to 
identify the culprit of her sleepless nights. She was so 
absorbed in this process that it was some moments 
before she noticed Mrs. Dalai of the third floor, who had 
come to set a tray of salted lemon peels out to dry in the 
sun. 

"Whatever is inside this quilt is keeping me awake at 
night," Boori Ma said. "Tell me, where do you see 
them?" 

Mrs. Dalai had a soft spot for Boori Ma, occasionally 
she gave the old woman some ginger paste with which 
to flavor her stews. "I don't see anything," Mrs. Dalai 
said after a while. She had diaphanous eyelids and very 
slender toes with rings on them. 

"Then they must have wings," Boori Ma concluded. 
She put down her broom and observed one cloud 
passing behind another. "They fly away before I can 



A REAL DURWAN SO 82 


squash them. But just see my back, I must be purple 
from their bites." 

M rs. Dalai lifted the drape of Boori M a's sari, a cheap 
white weave with a border the col or of a dirty pond. She 
examined the skin above and below her blouse, cut in a 
style no longer sold in shops. Then she said, "Boori Ma, 
you are i magi ni ng thi ngs." 

"I tell you, these mites are eating me alive." 

"It could be a case of prickly heat," Mrs. Dalai 
suggested. 

At this Boori Ma shook the free end of her sari and 
made her skeleton keys rattle. She said. "I know prickly 
heat. This is not prickly heat. I haven't slept in three, 
perhaps four days. Who can count? I used to keep a 
clean bed. Our linens were muslin. Believe me, don't 
believe me, our mosquito nets were as soft as silk. Such 
comforts you cannot even dream them." 

"I cannot dream them," Mrs. Dalai echoed. She 
lowered her diaphanous eyelids and sighed. "1 cannot 
dream them, Boori Ma. I live in two broken rooms, 
married to a man who sells toilet parts." Mrs. Dalai 
turned away and looked at one of the quilts. She ran a 
fi nger over part of the stitching. Then she asked: 

"Boori Ma, how long have you slept on this 
bedding?" 

Boori Ma put a finger to her lips before replying that 
she could not remember. 

"Then why no mention of it until today? Do you 
think it's beyond us to provideyou with clean quilts? An 
oilcloth, for that matter?" She looked insulted. 

"There is no need." Boori Ma said, "They are clean 
now. I beat them with my broom." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 83 


"I am hearing no arguments," Mrs. Dalai said. "You 
need a new bed. Quills, a pillow. A blanketwhen winter 
comes." As she spoke Mrs. Dalai kept track of the 
necessary items by touching her thumb to the pads of 
her fingers. 

"On festival days the poor came to our house to be 
fed," Boori Ma said. She was filling her bucket from the 
coal heap on the other side of the roof. 

"I will have a word with Mr. Dalai when he returns 
from the office," Mrs. Dalai called back as she headed 
down the stairs. "Come in the afternoon. I will give you 
some pickles and some powder for your back." 

"It's not prickly heat," Boori M a said. 

It was true that prickly heat was common during the 
rainy season. But Boori Ma preferred to think that what 
irritated her bed, what stole her sleep, what burned like 
peppers across her thinning scalp and skin, was of a less 
mundane origin. 

She was ruminating on these things as she swept the 
stairwell—she always worked from top to bottom— 
when it started to rain. It came slapping across the roof 
like a boy in slippers too big for him and washed Mrs. 
Dalai's lemon peels into the gutter. Before pedestrians 
could open their umbrellas, it rushed down collars, 
pockets, and shoes. In that particular flat-building and 
all the neighboring buildings, creaky shutters were 
closed and tied with petticoat strings to the window 
bars. 

At the time, Boori Ma was working all the way down 
on the second-floor landing. She looked up the 
ladderlike stairs, and as the sound of falling water 
tightened around her she knew her quilts were turning 
into yogurt. 



A REAL DURWAN SO 84 


But then she recalled her conversation with Mrs. 
Dalai. And so she continued, at the same pace, to sweep 
the dust, cigarette ends, and lozenge wrappers from the 
rest of the steps, until she reached the letter boxes at the 
bottom. To keep out the wind, she rummaged through 
her baskets for some newspapers and crammed them 
into the diamond-shaped openings of the collapsible 
gate. Then on her bucket of coals she set her lunch to 
boil, and monitored the flame with a plaited palmfan. 

That afternoon, as was her habit, Boori M a reknotted her 
hair, untied the loose end of her sari, and counted out 
her life savings. She had just woken from a nap of 
twenty minutes, which she had taken on a temporary 
bed made from newspapers. The rain had stopped and 
now the sour smell that rises from wet mango leaves 
was hanging low over the alley. 

On certain afternoons Boori Ma visited her fellow 
residents. She enjoyed drifting in and out of the various 
households. The residents, for their part, assured Boori 
Ma that she was always welcome: they never drew the 
latch bars across their doors except at night. They went 
about their business, scolding children or adding up 
expenses or picking stones out of the evening rice. From 
time to time she was handed a glass of tea, the cracker 
tin was passed in her direction, and she helped children 
shoot chips across the carom board. Knowing not to sit 
on the furniture, she crouched, instead, in doorways and 
hallways, and observed gestures and manners in the 
same way a person tends to watch traffic in a foreign 
city. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 85 


On this particular afternoon Boori Ma decided to 
accept Mrs. Dalai's invitation. Her back still itched, even 
after napping on the newspapers, and she was beginning 
to want some prickly-heat powder after all. She picked 
up her broom — she never felt quite herself without it — 
and was about to climb upstairs, when a rickshaw 
pulled up to the collapsible gate. 

It was Mr. Dalai. The years he had spent filing 
receipts had left him with purple crescents under his 
eyes. But today his gaze was bright. The tip of his tongue 
played between his teeth, and in the damp of his thighs 
he held two small ceramic basins. 

"Boori Ma, I have a job for you. Help me carry these 
basins upstairs." He pressed a folded handkerchief to his 
forehead and throat and gave the rickshaw driver a coin. 
Then he and Boori Ma carried the basins all the way up 
to the third floor. It wasn't until they were insidetheflat 
that he finally announced, to Mrs. Dalai, to Boori Ma, 
and to a few other residents who had followed them out 
of curiosity, the following things: that his hours filing 
receipts for a distributor of rubber tubes, pipes, and 
valve fittings had ended. That the distributor himself, 
who craved fresher air, and whose profits had doubled, 
was opening a second branch in Burdwan. And that, 
following an assessment of his sedulous performance 
over the years, the distributor was promoting M r. Dalai 
to manage the College Street branch. In his excitement 
on his way home through the plumbing district, Mr. 
Dalai had bought two basins. 

"What are we supposed to do with two basins in a 
two-room flat?" Mrs. Dalai demanded. She had already 
been sulking over her lemon peels. "Who ever heard of 
it? I still cook on kerosene. You refuse to apply for a 



A REAL DURWAN SO 86 


phone. And I have yet to see the fridge you promised 
when wemarried. You expect two basins to makeup for 
all that?" 

The argument that followed was loud enough to he 
heard all the way down to the letter boxes. It was loud 
enough, and long enough, to rise above a second spell of 
rain that fell after dark. It was loud enough even to 
distract Boori Ma as she swept the stairwell from top to 
bottom for the second time that day, and for this reason 
she spoke neither of her hardships, nor of easier times. 
She spent the night on a bed of newspapers. 

The argument between Mr. and Mrs. Dalai was still 
more or less in effect early the new morning when a 
barefoot team of workmen came to install the basins. 
After a night of tossing and pacing, Mr. Dalai had 
decided to install one basin in the sitting room of their 
flat, and the other one on the stairwell of the building, on 
the first-floor landing. "This way everyone can use it," 
he explained from door to door. The residents were 
delighted; for years they had all brushed their teeth with 
stored water poured from mugs. 

Mr. Dalai, meanwhile, was thinking: A sink on the 
stairwell is sure to impress visitors. Now that he was a 
company manager, who could say who might visit the 
building? 

The workmen toiled for several hours. They ran up 
and down the stairs and ate their lunches squatting 
against the banister poles. They hammered, shouted, 
spat, and cursed. They wiped their sweat with the ends 
of their turbans. In general, they made it impossible for 
Boori Mato sweep the stairwell that day. 

To occupy the time, Boori Ma retired to the rooftop. 
She shuffled along the parapdis, but her hips were sore 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 87 


from sleeping on newspapers. After consulting the 
horizon on all four sides, she tore what was left of her 
quilts into several strips and resolved to polish the 
bani ster pol es at a I ater ti me. 

By early evening the residents gathered to admire the 
day's labors. Even Boori Ma was urged to rinse her 
hands under the dear running water. She sniffed "Our 
bathwater was scented with petals and attars. Believe 
me, don't believe me, it was a luxury you cannot 
dream." 

Mr. Dalai proceeded to demonstrate the basin's 
various features. He turned each faucet completely on 
and completely off. Then he turned on both faucets at 
the same time, to illustrate the difference in water 
pressure. Lifting a small lever between the faucets 
allowed water to collect in the basin, if desired. 

"The last word in elegance," Mr. Dalai concluded. 

"A sure sign of changing times," Mr. Chatterjee 
reputedly admitted from his balcony. 

Among the wives, however, resentment quickly 
brewed. Standing in line to brush their teeth in the 
mornings, each grew frustrated with having to wait her 
turn, for having to wipe the faucets after every use, and 
for not being able to leave her own soap and toothpaste 
tube on the basin's narrow periphery. The Dalals had 
their own sink; why did the rest of them have to share? 

"Is it beyond us to buy sinks of our own?" one of 
them finally burst out one morning. 

"Are the Dalals the only ones who can improve the 
conditions of this building?" asked another. 

Rumors began spreading that, following their 
argument, Mr. Dalai had consoled his wife by buying 
her two kilos of mustard oil, a Kashmiri shawl, a dozen 



A REAL DURWAN 8S> 88 


cakes of sandalwood soap; that Mr. Dalai had filed an 
application for a telephone line; that Mrs. Dalai did 
nothing but wash her hands in her basin all day. As if 
this weren't enough, the next morning, a taxi bound for 
Howrah Station crammed its wheels into the alley; the 
Dalals were going to Si ml a for ten days. 

"Boori Ma, I haven't forgotten. We will bring you 
back a sheep's-hair blanket made in the mountains," 
Mrs. Dalai said through the open window of the taxi. 
She was holding a leather purse in her lap which 
matched the turquoise border of her sari. 

"We will bring two!" cried Mr. Dalai, who was sitting 
beside his wife, checking his pockets to make sure his 
wallet was in place. 

Of all the people who lived in that particular flat¬ 
building, Boori Ma was the only one who stood by the 
collapsible gate and wished them a safejourney. 

As soon as the Dalals were gone, the other wives 
began planning renovations of their own. One decided 
to barter a stack of her wedding bracelets and 
commissioned a w hi te-washer to freshen thewallsof the 
stairwell. Another pawned her sewing machine and 
summoned an exterminator. A third went to the 
silversmith and sold back a set of pudding bowls; she 
intended to have the shutters painted yellow. 

Workers began to occupy this particular flat-building 
night and day. To avoid the traffic, Boori Ma took to 
sleeping on the rooftop. So many people passed in and 
out of the collapsible gate, so many others clogged the 
alley at all times, that there was no point in keeping 
track of them. 

After a few days Boori M a moved her baskets and her 
cooki ng bucket to the rooftop as wel I. There was no need 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 89 


to use the basin downstairs, for she could just as easily 
wash, as she always had, from the cistern tap. She still 
planned to polish the banister poles with the strips she 
had torn from her quilts. She continued to sleep on her 
newspapers. 

More rains came. Below the dripping awning, a 
newspaper pressed over her head, Boori Ma squatted 
and watched the monsoon ants as they marched along 
the clothesline, carrying eggs in their mouths. Damper 
winds soothed her back. Her newspapers were running 
low. 

Her mornings were long, her afternoons longer. She 
could not remember her last glass of tea. Thinking 
neither of her hardships nor of earlier times, she 
wondered when the Dalals would return with her new 
bedding. 

She grew restless on the roof, and so for some 
exercise, Boori Ma started aiding the neighborhood in 
the afternoons. Reed broom in hand, sari smeared with 
newsprint ink, she wandered through markets and 
began spending her life savings on small treats: today a 
packet of puffed rice, tomorrow some cashews, the day 
after that, a cup of sugarcane juice. One day she walked 
as far as the bookstalls on College Street. The next day 
she walked even farther, to the produce markets in Bow 
Bazaar. It was there, while she was standing in a 
shopping arcade surveying jackfruits and persimmons, 
that she felt something tugging on the free end of her 
sari. When she looked, the rest of her lifesaving and her 
skeleton keys were gone. 

The residents were waiting for Boori Ma when she 
returned that afternoon at the collapsible gate. Baleful 
cries tang up and down the stairwell, all echoing the 



A REAL DURWAN SO 90 


same news: the basin on the stairwell had been stolen. 
There was a big hole in the recently whitewashed wall, 
and a tangle of rubber tubes and pipes was sticking out 
of it. Chunks of plaster littered the landing. Boori Ma 
gripped her reed broom and said nothing. 

In their haste the residents practically carried Boori 
M a up the stairs to the roof, where they planted her on 
one side of the clothesline and started screaming at her 
from the other. 

"This is all her doing," one of them hollered, pointing 
at Boori M a. "She informed the robbers. Where was she 
when she was supposed to guard the gate?" 

"For days she has been wandering the streets, 
speaking to strangers," another reported. 

"We shared our coal, gave her a place to sleep. How 
could she betray us this way?" a third wanted to know. 

Though none of them spoke directly to Boori M a, she 
replied, "Believe me, believe me, I did not inform the 
robbers." 

"For years we have put up with your lies," they 
retorted "You expect us, now, to believeyou?" 

Their recriminations persisted. How would they 
explain it to the Dalals? Eventually they sought the 
advice of Mr. Chatterjee. They found him sitting on his 
balcony, watching a traffic jam. 

One of the second-floor residents said, "Boori Mahas 
endangered the security of this building. We have 
valuables. The widow Mrs. Misra lives alone with her 
phone. What should we do?" 

Mr. Chatterjee considered their arguments. As he 
thought things over, he adjusted the shawl that was 
wrapped around his shoulders and gazed at the bamboo 
scaffolding that now surrounded his balcony. The 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 91 


shutters behind him, colorless for as long as he could 
remember, had been painted yellow. Finally he said: 

"Boori Ma's mouth is full of ashes. But that is nothing 
new. What is new is the face of this building. What a 
building likethisneedsisareal durwan.” 

So the residents tossed her bucket and rags, her 
baskets and reed broom, down the stairwell, past the 
letter boxes, through the collapsible gate, and into the 
alley. Then they tossed our Boori Ma. All were eager to 
begin their search for a real durwan. 

From the pile of belongings Boori Ma kept only her 
broom. "Believe me, believe me," she said once more as 
her figure began to recede. She shook the free end of her 
sari, but nothing rattled. 



Sexy 


I T WAS A WIFE'S WORST N I G H T M A R E . After 
nine years of marriage, Laxmi told Miranda, her 
cousin's husband had fallen in love with another 
woman. He sat next to her on a plane, on a flight from 
Delhi to Montreal, and instead of flying home to his wife 
and son, he got off with the woman at Heathrow. He 
called his wife, and told her he'd had a conversation that 
had changed his life, and that he needed time to figure 
things out. Laxmi's cousin had taken to her bed. 

"Not that I blame her," Laxmi said. She reached for 
the Hot Mix she munched throughout the day, which 
looked to Miranda like dusty orange cereal. "Imagine. 
An English girl, half his age." Laxmi was only a few 
years older than M iranda, but she was already married, 
and kept a photo of herself and her husband, seated on a 
white stone bench in front of the Taj M ahal, tacked to the 
inside of her cubicle, which was next to Miranda's. 
Laxmi had been on the phone for at least an hour, trying 
to calm her cousin down. No one noticed; they worked 
for a public radio station, in the fund-raising 


INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 93 


department, and were surrounded by people who spent 
all day on the phone, soliciting pledges. 

"I feel worst for the boy," Laxmi added. "He's been at 
home for days. My cousin said she can't even take him 
to school." 

"It sounds awful," Miranda said. Normally Laxmi's 
phone conversations —mainly to her husband, about 
what to cook for dinner — distracted Miranda as she 
typed letters, asking members of the radio station to 
increase their annual pledge in exchange for a tote bag 
or an umbrella. She could hear Laxmi clearly, her 
sentences peppered every now and then with an Indian 
word, through the laminated wall between their desks. 
But that afternoon Miranda hadn't been listening. She'd 
been on the phone herself, with Dev, deciding whereto 
meet I ater that eveni ng. 

"Then again, a few days at home won't hurt him." 
Laxmi ate some more Hot Mix, then put it away in a 
drawer. "He's something of a genius. He has a Punjabi 
mother and a Bengali father, and because he learns 
French and English at school he already speaks four 
languages. I think he skipped two grades." 

Dev was Bengali, too. At first Miranda thought it was 
a religion. But then he pointed it out to her, a place in 
India called Bengal, in a map printed in an issue of The 
Economist. Hehad brought the magazine specially to her 
apartment, for she did not own an atlas, or any other 
books with maps in them. He'd pointed to the city where 
he'd been born, and another city where his father had 
been born. One of the cities had a box around it, 
intended to attract the reader's eye. When Miranda 
asked what the box indicated, Dev rolled up the 



Sexy k> 94 


magazine, and said, "Nothing you'll ever need to worry 
about," and he tapped her playfully on the head. 

Before leaving her apartment he'd tossed the 
magazine in the garbage, along with the ends of the 
three cigarettes he always smoked in the course of his 
visits. But after she watched his car disappear down 
Commonwealth Avenue, back to his house in the 
suburbs, where he lived with his wife, Miranda retrieved 
it, and brushed the ashes off the cover, and tolled it in 
the opposite direction to get it to lie flat. She got into 
bed, still rumpled from their lovemaking, and studied 
the borders of Bengal. There was a bay below and 
mountains above. The map was connected to an article 
about something called theGramin Bank. She turned the 
page, hoping for a photograph of the city where Dev 
was born, but all she found were graphs and grids. Still, 
she stared at them, thinking the whole while about Dev, 
about how only fifteen minutes ago he'd propped her 
feet on top of his shoulders, and pressed her knees to her 
chest, and told her that he couldn't get enough other. 

She'd met him a week ago, at Filene's. She was there 
on her lunch break, buying discounted pantyhose in the 
Basement. Afterward she took the escalator to the main 
part of the store, to the cosmetics department, where 
soaps and creams were displayed like jewels, and eye 
shadows and powders shimmered like butterflies 
pinned behind protective glass. Though Miranda had 
never bought anything other than a lipstick, she liked 
walking through the cramped, confined maze, which 
was familiar to her in a way the rest of Boston still was 
not. She liked negotiating her way past the women 
planted at every turn, who sprayed cards with perfume 
and waved them in the air: sometimes she would find a 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 95 


card days afterward, folded in her coat pocket, and the 
rich aroma, still faintly preserved, would warm her as 
shewaited on cold mornings for the T. 

That day, stopping to smell one of the more pleasing 
cards, Miranda noticed a man standing at one of the 
counters. He held a slip of paper covered in a precise, 
feminine hand. A saleswoman took one look at the paper 
and began to open drawers. She produced an oblong 
cake of soap in a black case, a hydrating mask, a vial of 
cell renewal drops, and two cubes of face cream. The 
man was tanned, with black hair that was visible on his 
knuckles. He wore a flamingo pink shirt, a navy blue 
suit, a camel overcoat with gleaming leather buttons. In 
order to pay he had taken off pigskin gloves. Crisp bills 
emerged from a burgundy wallet. He didn't wear a 
wedding ring. 

"What can I get you, honey?" the saleswoman asked 
Miranda. She looked over the tops of her tortoiseshell 
glasses, assessing Miranda's complexion. 

Miranda didn't know what she wanted. All she knew 
was that she didn't want the man to walk away. He 
seemed to be lingering, waiting, along with the 
saleswoman, for her to say something. She stared at 
some bottles, some short, others tall, arranged on an oval 
tray, likeafamily posing for a photograph. 

"A cream," Miranda said eventually. 

"How old are you?" 

"Twenty-two." 

The saleswoman nodded, opening a frosted bottle. 
"This may seem a bit heavier than what you're used to, 
but I'd start now. All your wrinkles aregoing to form by 
twenty-five. After that they just start showing." 



Sexy k> 96 


While the saleswoman dabbed the cream on 
Miranda's face, the man stood and watched. While 
Miranda was told the proper way to apply it, in swift 
upward strokes beginning at the base of her throat, he 
spun the lipstick carousel. He pressed a pump that 
dispensed cellulite gel and massaged it into the back of 
his ungloved band. He opened a jar, leaned over, and 
drew so close that a drop of cream flecked his nose. 

Miranda smiled, but her mouth was obscured by a 
large brush that the saleswoman was sweeping over her 
face "This is blusher Number Two," the woman said. 
"Gives you some col or." 

Miranda nodded, glancing at her reflection in one of 
the angled minors that lined the counter. She had silver 
eyes and skin as pale as paper, and the contrast with her 
hair, as dark and glossy as an espresso bean, caused 
people to describe her as striking, if not pretty. She had a 
narrow, egg-shaped head that rose to a prominent point. 
H er features, too, were narrow, with nostrils so slim that 
they appeared to have been pinched with a clothespin. 
Now her face glowed, rosy at the cheeks, smoky below 
the brow bone. H er I i ps gl i stened. 

The man was glancing in a mirror, too, quickly 
wiping the cream from his nose. Miranda wondered 
where he was from. Shethought he might be Spanish, or 
Lebanese. When he opened another jar, and said, to no 
one in particular, "This one smells like pineapple," she 
detected only the hint of an accent. 

"Anything else for you today?" the saleswoman 
asked, accepting M iranda's credit card. 

"No thanks," 

The woman wrapped the cream in several layers of 
red tissue. "You'll be very happy with this product," 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 97 


M iranda's hand was unsteady as she signed the receipt. 
The man hadn't budged. 

"I threw in a sample of our new eye gel," the 
saleswoman added, handing Miranda a small shopping 
bag. She looked at Miranda's credit card before sliding it 
across the counter. "Bye-bye, Miranda." 

Miranda began walking. At first she sped up. Then, 
noticing the doors that led to Downtown Crossing, she 
slowed down. 

"Part of your name is Indian," the man said, pacing 
his steps with hers. 

She stopped, as did he, at a circular table piled with 
sweaters, flanked with pinecones and velvet bows. 
"Miranda?" 

"Mira. I have an aunt named Mira," 

His name was Dev. He worked in an investment bank 
back that way, hesaid, tilting his head in thedirection of 
South Station. He was the first man with a mustache, 
Mirandadecided, shefound handsome. 

They walked together toward Park Street station, past 
the kiosks that sold cheap belts and handbags. A fierce 
January wind spoiled the part in her hair. As she fished 
for a token in her coat pocket, her eyes fell to his 
shopping bag. "And those are for her?" 

"Who?" 

"Your Aunt Mira." 

"They're for my wife." He uttered the words slowly, 
holding Miranda's gaze. "She's going to India for a few 
weeks." He rolled his eyes. "She'sad dieted to this stuff." 

Somehow, without the wife there, it didn't seem so 
wrong. At first Miranda and Dev spent every night 



Sexy sa 98 


together, almost. He explained that he couldn't spend 
the whole night at her place, because his wife called 
every day at six in the morning, from India, where it was 
four in the afternoon. And so he left her apartment at 
two, three, often as late as four in the morning, driving 
back to his house in the suburbs. During the day he 
called her every hour, it seemed, from work, or from his 
cell phone. Once he learned Miranda's schedule he left 
her a message each evening at five-thirty, when shewas 
on theT coming back to her apartment, just so, he said, 
she could hear his voice as soon as she walked through 
thedoor. "I'm thinking about you," he'd say on thetape. 
"I can't wait to see you." He told her he liked spending 
time in her apartment, with its kitchen counter no wider 
than a breadbox, and scratchy floors that sloped, and a 
buzzer in the lobby that always made a slightly 
embarrassing sound when he pressed it. He said he 
admired her for moving to Boston, where she knew no 
one, instead of remaining in Michigan, where she'd 
grown up and gone to college. When Miranda told him 
it was nothing to admire, that she'd moved to Boston 
precisely for that reason, he shook his head. "I know 
what it's like to be lonely," he said, suddenly serious, 
and at that moment Miranda felt that he understood 
her — understood how she felt some nights on the T, 
after seeing a movie on her own, or going to a bookstore 
to read magazines, or having drinks with Laxmi, who 
always had to meet her husband at A lew ife station in an 
hour or two. In less serious moments Dev said he liked 
that her legs were longer than her torso, something he'd 
observed the first time she walked across a room naked. 
"You're the first," he told her, admiring her from the 
bed. "Thefirst woman I'veknown with legs this long." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES BO 99 


Dev was the first to tell her that. Uni ike the boys she 
dated in college, who were simply taller, heavier 
versions of the ones she dated in high school, Dev was 
the first always to pay for things, and hold doors open, 
and reach across a table in a restaurant to kiss her hand. 
He was the first to bring her a bouquet of flowers so 
immense she'd had to split it up into all six of her 
drinking glasses, and thefirstto whisper her name again 
and again when they made love. Within days of meeting 
him, when she was at work, Miranda began to wish that 
there were a picture of her and Dev tacked to the inside 
of her cubicle, liketheoneof Laxmi and her husband in 
front of theTaj Mahal. She didn't tell Laxmi about Dev. 
She didn't tell anyone. Part of her wanted to tell Laxmi, 
if only because Laxmi was Indian, too. But Laxmi was 
always on the phone with her cousin these days, who 
was still in bed, whose husband was still in London, and 
whose son still wasn't going to school. "You must eat 
something," Laxmi would urge. "You mustn't lose your 
health." When she wasn't speaking to her cousin, she 
spoke to her husband, shorter conversations, in which 
she ended up arguing about whether to have chicken or 
lamb for dinner. "I'm sorry," Miranda heard her 
apologize at one point. "This whole thing just makes me 
a little paranoid." 

M iranda and Dev didn't argue. They went to movies 
at the Nickelodeon and kissed the whole time. They ate 
pulled pork and cornbread in Davis Square, a paper 
napki n tucked I i ke a cravat i nto the col I ar of Dev's shirt. 
They sipped sangria at the bar of a Spanish restaurant, a 
grinning pig's head presiding over their conversation. 
They went to the M FA and picked out a poster of water 
lilies for her bedroom. One Saturday, following an 



Sexy ss> 100 


afternoon concert at Symphony Hall, he showed her his 
favorite pi ace in the city, theMapparium at the Christian 
Science center, where they stood inside a room made of 
glowing stained-glass panels, which was shaped likethe 
inside of a globe, but looked like the outside of one. In 
the middle of the room was a transparent bridge, so that 
they felt as if they were standing in the center of the 
world. Dev pointed to India, which was red, and far 
more detailed than the map in The Economist. He 
explained that many of the countries, like Siam and 
Italian Somaliland, no longer existed in the same way; 
the names had changed by now. The ocean, as blue as a 
peacock's breast, appeared in two shades, depending on 
the depth of the water. H e showed her the deepest spot 
on earth, seven miles deep, above the Mariana Islands. 
They peered over the bridge and saw the Antarctic 
archipelago at their feet, craned their necks and saw a 
giant metal star overhead. As Dev spoke, his voice 
bounced wildly off the glass, sometimes loud, 
sometimes soft, sometimes seeming to land in M iranda's 
chest, sometimes eluding her ear altogether. When a 
group of tourists walked onto the bridge, she could hear 
them clearing their throats, as if through microphones, 
Dev explained that it was because of the acoustics. 

Miranda found London, where Laxmi's cousin's 
husband was, with the woman he'd met on the plane. 
She wondered which of the cities in India Dev's wife 
was in. The farthest Miranda had ever been was to the 
Bahamas once when she was a child. She searched but 
couldn't find it on the glass panels. When the tourists left 
and she and Dev were alone again, he told her to stand 
at one end of the bridge. Even though they were thirty 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 101 


feet apart, Dev said, they'd be able to hear each other 
whisper. 

"I don't believe you," Miranda said. It was the first 
time she'd spoken since they'd entered. She felt as if 
speakers were embedded in her ears. 

"Go ahead," he urged, walking backward to his end 
of the bridge. His voice dropped to a whisper. "Say 
something." She watched his lips forming the words; at 
the same time she heard them so clearly that she felt 
them under her skin, under her winter coat, so near and 
full of warmth that she felt herself go hot. 

"Hi," shewhispered, unsure of what else to say. 

"You'resexy," hewhispered back. 

At work the following week, Laxmi told Miranda that it 
wasn't the first time her cousin's husband had had an 
affair. "She's decided to let him come to his senses," 
Laxmi said one evening as they were getting ready to 
leave the office. "She says it's for the boy. She's willing 
to forgive him for the boy." Miranda waited as Laxmi 
shut off her computer. "He'll come crawling back, and 
she'll let him," Laxmi said, shaking her head. "Not me. If 
my husband so much as looked at another woman I'd 
change the locks." She studied the picture tacked to her 
cubicle. Laxmi's husband had his arm draped over her 
shoulder, his knees leaning in toward her on the bench. 
Sheturned to Miranda, "Wouldn'tyou?" 

She nodded. Dev's wife was coming back from India 
the next day. That afternoon he'd called Miranda at 
work, to say he had to go to the airport to pick her up. 
He promised he'd call as soon as he could. 

"What'stheTaj Mahal like?" she asked Laxmi. 



Sexy so 102 


"The most romantic spot on earth." Laxmi's face 
brightened at the memory. "An everlasting monument 
to love." 

While Dev was at the airport, Miranda went to Filene's 
Basement to buy herself things she thought a mistress 
should have. She found a pair of black high heels with 
buckles smaller than a baby's teeth. She found a satin 
slip with scalloped edges and a knee-length silk robe. 
Instead of the pantyhose she normally wore to work, she 
found sheer stockings with a seam. She searched 
through piles and wandered through racks, pressing 
back hanger after hanger, until she found a cocktail 
dress made of a slinky silvery material that matched her 
eyes, with little chains for straps. As she shopped she 
thought about Dev, and about what he'd told her in the 
Mapparium. It was the first time a man had called her 
sexy, and when shedosed her eyes she could still feel his 
whisper drifting through her body, under her skin. In 
the fitting room, which was just one big room with 
mirrors on the walls, she found a spot next to an older 
woman with a shiny face and coarse frosted hair. The 
woman stood barefoot in her underwear, pulling the 
bl ack net of a body stocki ng taut between her fi ngers. 

"Always check for snags," the woman advised. 

Miranda pulled out the satin slip with scalloped 
edges. She hel d it to her chest. 

The woman nodded with approval. "Oh yes." 

"And this?" She held up the silver cocktail dress. 

"Absolutely," the woman said "He'll want to rip it 
right off you." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 103 


M iranda pictured the two of them at a restaurant in 
the South End they'd been to, where Dev had ordered 
foie gras and a soup made with champagne and 
raspberries. She pictured herself in the cocktail dress, 
and Dev in one of his suits, kissing her hand across the 
table. Only the next time Dev came to visit her, on a 
Sunday afternoon several days si nee the last time they'd 
seen each other, he was in gym clothes. After his wife 
came back, that was his excuse: on Sundays he drove 
into Boston and went running along the Charles. The 
first Sunday she opened the door in the knee-length 
robe, but Dev didn't even notice it; he carried her over to 
the bed, wearing sweatpants and sneakers, and entered 
her without a word. Later, she slipped on the robe when 
she walked across the room to get him a saucer for his 
cigarette ashes, but he complained that she was 
depriving him of the sight of her long legs, and 
demanded that she remove it. So the next Sunday she 
didn't bother. Sheworejeans. She kept the lingerie at the 
back of a drawer, behind her socks and everyday 
underwear. The silver cocktail dress hung in her closet, 
the tag dangling from the seam. Often, in the morning, 
the dress would be in a heap on the floor; the chain 
straps always slipped off the metal hanger. 

Still, Miranda looked forward to Sundays. In the 
mornings she went to a deli and bought a baguette and 
little containers of things Dev liked to eat, like pickled 
herring, and potato salad, and tortes of pesto and 
mascarpone cheese. They ate in bed, picking up the 
herring with their fingers and ripping the baguette with 
their hands. Dev told her stories about his childhood, 
when he would come home from school and drink 
mango juice served to him on a tray, and then play 



Sexy so 104 


cricket by a lake, dressed all in white. He told her about 
how, at eighteen, he'd been sent to a college in upstate 
New York during something called the Emergency, and 
about how it took him years to be able to follow 
American accents in movies, in spite of the fact that he'd 
had an English-medium education. As he talked he 
smoked three cigarettes, crushing them in a saucer by 
the side of her bed. Sometimes he asked her questions, 
like how many lovers she'd had (three) and how old 
she'd been the first time (nineteen). After lunch they 
made love, on sheets covered with crumbs, and then 
Dev took a nap for twelve minutes. Miranda had never 
known an adult who took naps, but Dev said it was 
something he'd grown up doing in India, where it was 
so hot that people didn't leave their homes until the sun 
went down. "Plus it allows us to sleep together,” he 
murmured mischievously, curving his arm like a big 
bracelet around her body. 

Only M iranda never slept. She watched the clock on 
her bedside table, or pressed her face against Dev's 
fingers, intertwined with hers, each with its half-dozen 
hairs at the knuckle. After six minutes she turned to face 
him, sighing and stretching, to test if he was really 
sleeping. He always was. His ribs were visible through 
his skin as he breathed, and yet he was beginning to 
develop a paunch. He complained about the hair on his 
shoulders, but Miranda thought him perfect, and 
refused to i magi ne hi m any other way. 

At the end of twelve minutes Dev would open his 
eyes as if he'd been awake all along, smiling at her, full 
of a contentment she wished she felt herself. "The best 
twelve minutes of the week." He'd sigh, running a hand 
along the backs of her calves. Then he'd spring out of 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 105 


bed, pulling on his sweatpants and lacing up his 
sneakers. He would go to the bathroom and brush his 
teeth with his index finger, something he told her all 
Indians knew how to do, to get rid of the smoke in his 
mouth. When she kissed him good-bye she smelled 
herself sometimes in his hair. But she knew that his 
excuse, that he'd spent the afternoon jogging, allowed 
hi m to take a shower when he got home, fi rst thi ng. 

Apart from Laxmi and Dev, the only Indians whom 
Miranda had known were a family in the neighborhood 
where she'd grown up, named the Dixits. Much to the 
amusement of the neighborhood children, including 
Miranda, but not including the Dixit children, Mr. Dixit 
would jog each evening along the flat winding streets of 
their development in his everyday shirt and trousers, his 
only concession to athletic apparel a pair of cheap Keds. 
Every weekend, the family — mother, father, two boys, 
and a girl —piled into their car and went away, to 
where nobody knew. The fathers complained that Mr. 
Dixit did not fertilize his lawn properly, did not rakehis 
leaves on time, and agreed that the Dixits' house, the 
only one with vinyl siding, detracted from the 
neighborhood's charm. The mothers never invited Mrs. 
Dixit to join them around the Armstrongs' swimming 
pool. Waiting for the school bus with the Dixit children 
standing to one side, the other children would say "The 
Dixits dig shit," under their breath, and then burst into 
laughter. 

One year, all the neighborhood children were invited 
to the birthday party of the Dixit girl. Miranda 
remembered a heavy aroma of incense and onions in the 



Sexy so 106 


house, and a pile of shoes heaped by the front door. But 
most of all she remembered a piece of fabric, about the 
size of a pillowcase, which hung from a wooden dowel 
at the bottom of the stairs. It was a painting of a naked 
woman with a red face shaped I ike a knight's shield. She 
had enormous white eyes that tilted toward her temples, 
and mere dots for pupils. Two circles, with the same 
dots at their centers, indicated her breasts. In one hand 
she brandished a dagger. With one foot she crushed a 
struggling man on the ground. Around her body was a 
necklace composed of bleeding heads, strung together 
like a popcorn chain. She stuck her tongue out at 
Miranda. 

"It is the goddess Kali," Mrs. Dixit explained brightly, 
shifting the dowel slightly in order to straighten the 
image. Mrs. Dixit's hands were painted with henna, an 
intricate pattern of zigzags and stars. "Come please, time 
for cake." 

M iranda, then nine years old, had been too frightened 
to eat the cake. For months afterward she'd been too 
frightened even to walk on the same side of the street as 
the Dixits' house, which she had to pass twice daily, 
once to get to the bus stop, and once again to come 
home. For a while she even held her breath until she 
reached the next lawn, just as she did when the school 
bus passed a cemetery. 

It shamed her now. Now, when she and Dev made 
love, Miranda closed her eyes and saw deserts and 
elephants, and marble pavilions floating on lakes 
beneath a full moon. One Saturday, having nothing else 
to do, she walked to Central Square, to an Indian 
restaurant, and ordered a plate of tandoori chicken. As 
she ate she tried to memorize phrases printed at the 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 107 


bottom of the menu, for things like "delicious" and 
"water" and "check, please." The phrases didn't stick in 
her mind, and so she began to stop from time to time in 
the foreign language section of a bookstore in Kenmore 
Square, where she studied the Bengali alphabet in the 
Teach Yourself series. Once she went so far as to try to 
transcribe the Indian part of her name, "Mira," into her 
Filofax, her hand moving in unfamiliar directions, 
stopping and turning and picking up her pen when she 
least expected to. Following the arrows in the book, she 
drew a bar from I eft to right from which the letters hung; 
one looked more like a number than a letter, another 
looked I ike a triangle on its side. Ithad taken her several 
tri es to get the I etters of her name to resembl e the sampl e 
letters in the book, and even then she wasn't sure if 
she'd written Mira or Mara. It was a scribble to her, but 
somewhere in the world, she realized with a shock, it 
meant something. 

During the week it wasn't so bad. Work kept her busy, 
and she and Laxmi had begun having lunch together at a 
new Indian restaurant around the corner, during which 
Laxmi reported the latest status of her cousin's marriage. 
Sometimes Miranda tried to change the topic; it made 
her feel the way she once felt in college when she and 
her boyfriend at the time had walked away from a 
crowded house of pancakes without paying for their 
food, just to see if they could getaway with it. But Laxmi 
spoke of nothing else. "If I were her I'd fly straight to 
London and shoot them both," she announced one day. 
She snapped a papadum in half and dipped it into 
chutney. "I don't know how she can just wait this way." 



Sexy ss> 108 


Miranda knew how to wait. In the evenings she sat at 
her dining table and coated her nails with dear nail 
polish, and ate salad straight from the salad bowl, and 
watched television, and waited for Sunday. Saturdays 
were the worst, because by Saturday it seemed that 
Sunday would never come. One Saturday when Dev 
called, late at night, she heard people laughing and 
talking in the background, so many that she asked him if 
he was at a concert hall. But he was only calling from his 
house in the suburbs. "I can't hear you that well," he 
said. "We have guests. Miss me?" She looked at the 
television screen, a sitcom that she'd muted with the 
remote control when the phone rang. She pictured him 
whispering into his cell phone, in a room upstairs, a 
hand on the doorknob, the hallway filled with guests. 
"Miranda, do you miss me?" he asked again. She told 
him that shedid. 

The next day, when Dev came to visit, Miranda asked 
him what his wife looked like. She was nervous to ask, 
waiting until he'd smoked the last of his cigarettes, 
crushing it with a firm twist into the saucer. She 
wondered if they'd quarrel. But Dev wasn't surprised by 
the question. He told her, spreading some smoked 
whitefish on a cracker, that his wife resembled an actress 
in Bombay named Madhuri Dixit. 

For an instant Miranda's heart stopped. But no, the 
Dixit girl had been named something else, something 
that began with P. Still, she wondered if the actress and 
the Dixit girl were related. She'd been plain, wearing her 
hair in two braids all through high school. 

A few days later Miranda went to an Indian grocery 
in Central Square that also rented videos. The door 
opened to a complicated tinkling of bells. It was 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 109 


dinnertime and she was the only customer. A video was 
playing on a television hooked up in a corner of the 
store: a row of young women in harem pants were 
thrusti ng thei r hi ps i n synchrony on a beach. 

"Can I help you?" the man standing at the cash 
register asked. He was eating a samosa, dipping it into 
some dark-brown sauce on a paper plate. Below the 
glass counter at his waist were trays of more plump 
samosas and what looked like pale, diamond-shaped 
pieces of fudge covered with foil, and some bright 
orange pastries floating in syrup. "You like some 
video?" 

Miranda opened up her Filofax where she had 
written down "Mottery Dixit." She looked up at the 
videos on the shelves behind the counter. She saw 
women wearing skirts that sat low on the hips and tops 
that tied like bandannas between their breasts. Some 
leaned back against a stone wall, or a tree. They were 
beautiful, the way the women dancing on the beach 
were beautiful, with kohl-rimmed eyes and long black 
hair. She knew then that Madhuri Dixit was beautiful, 
too. 

"We have subtitled versions, miss," the man 
continued. He wiped his fingertips quickly on his shirt 
and pulled out three titles. 

"No," Miranda said. "Thank you, no." She wandered 
through the store, studying shelves lined with 
unlabelled packets and tins. The freezer case was stuffed 
with bags of pita bread and vegetables she didn't 
recognize. The only thing she recognized was a rack 
lined with bags and bags of the Hot Mix that Laxmi was 
always eating. She thought about buying some for 



Sexy sd 110 


Laxmi, then hesitated, wondering how to explain what 
she'd been doing in an Indian grocery. 

"Very spicy," the man said, shaking his head, his eyes 
traveling across M iranda's body. "Too spicy for you." 

By February Laxmi's cousin's husband still hadn't come 
to his senses. He had returned to Montreal, argued 
bitterly with his wife for two weeks, packed two 
suitcases, and flown back to London. He wanted a 
divorce. 

Miranda sat in her cubicleand listened as Laxmi kept 
telling her cousin that there were better men in the 
world, just waiting to come out of the woodwork. The 
next day the cousin said she and her son were going to 
her parents' house in California, to try to recuperate. 
Laxmi convinced her to arrange a weekend layover in 
Boston. "A quick change of place will do you good," 
Laxmi insisted gently, "besides which, I haven't seen 
you in years." 

Miranda stared at her own phone, wishing Dev 
would call, It had been four days since their last 
conversation. She heard Laxmi dialing directory 
assistance, asking for the number of a beauty salon. 
"Something soothing," Laxmi requested. She scheduled 
massages, facials, manicures, and pedicures. Then she 
reserved a table for lunch at the Four Seasons. In her 
determination to cheer up her cousin, Laxmi had 
forgotten about the boy. She rapped her knuckles on the 
laminated wall. 

"A re you busy Saturday?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES sa 111 


The boy was thin. He wore a yellow knapsack strapped 
across his back, gray herringbone trousers, a red V- 
necked sweater, and black leather shoes. His hair was 
cut in a thick fringe over hiseyes, which had dark circles 
under them. They were the first thing Miranda noticed. 
They made him look haggard, as if he smoked a great 
deal and slept very little, in spite of the fact that he was 
only seven years old. Heclasped a large sketch pad with 
a spiral binding. His name was Rohin. 

"Ask me a capital," he said, staring up at Miranda. 

She stared back at him. It was eight-thirty on a 
Saturday morning. She took a sip of coffee. "A what?" 

"It's a game he's been playing," Laxmi's cousin 
explained. She was thin like her son, with a long face 
and thesamedark circles under her eyes. A rust-colored 
coat hung heavy on her shoulders. Her black hair, with a 
few strands of gray at the temples, was pulled back like 
a ballerina's. "You ask him a country and hetellsyou the 
capital." 

"You should have heard him in the car," Laxmi said. 
"He'salready memorized all of Europe." 

"It's not a game," Rohin said. "I'm having a 
competition with a boy at school. We're competing to 
memorize all the capitals. I'm going to beat him." 

Miranda nodded. "Okay. What's the capital of 
India?" 

"That's no good." He marched away, his arms 
swinging like a toy soldier. Then he marched back to 
Laxmi's cousin and tugged at a pocket of her overcoat, 
"Ask me a hard one." 

"Senegal," she said. 

"Dakar!" Rohin exclaimed triumphantly, and began 
running in larger and larger circles. Eventually he ran 



Sexy sd 112 


into the kitchen. Miranda could hear him opening and 
closing the fridge. 

"Rohin, don't touch without asking," Laxmi's cousin 
called out wearily. She managed a smile for Miranda. 
"Don't worry, he'll fall asleep in a few hours. And 
thanks for watching him." 

"Back at three," Laxmi said, disappearing with her 
cousin down the hallway, "We'redouble-parked." 

M iranda fastened the chain on the door. She went to 
the kitchen to find Rohin, but he was now in the living 
room, at the dining table, kneeling on one of the 
director's chairs. He unzipped his knapsack, pushed 
Miranda's basket of manicure supplies to one side of the 
table, and spread his crayons over the surface. Miranda 
stood over his shoulder. She watched as he gripped a 
bluecrayon and drew the outline of an airplane. 

"It's lovely," she said. When he didn't reply, she went 
to the kitchen to pour herself more coffee. 

"Somefor me, please," Rohin called out. 

She returned to the living room. "Somewhat?" 

"Somecoffee. There's enough in the pot. I saw." 

She walked over to the table and sat opposite him. At 
times he nearly stood up to reach for a new crayon. He 
barely made a dent i n the di rector's chai r. 

"You'retoo young for coffee." 

Rohin leaned over the sketch pad, so that his tiny 
chest and shoulders almost touched it, his head tilted to 
one side. "The stewardess let me have coffee." he said. 
"She made it with milk and lots of sugar." He 
straightened, revealing a woman's face beside the plane, 
with long wavy hair and eyes like asterisks, "Her hair 
was more shiny," he decided, adding, "My father met a 
pretty woman on a plane, too." He looked at Miranda. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 113 


His face darkened as he watched her sip. "Can't I have 
just a I ittle coffee? PI ease?" 

She wondered, in spite of his composed, brooding 
expression, if he were the type to throw a tantrum. She 
imagined his kicking her with his leather shoes, 
screaming for coffee, screaming and crying until his 
mother and Laxmi came back to fetch him. She went to 
the kitchen and prepared a cup for him as he'd 
requested. She selected a mug she didn't care for, in case 
he dropped it. 

"Thank you," he said when she put it on the table. He 
took short sips, holding the mug securely with both 
hands. 

Miranda sat with him while he drew, but when she 
attempted to put a coat of clear polish on her nails he 
protested. Instead he pulled out a paperback world 
almanac from his knapsack and asked her to quiz him. 
The countries were arranged by continent, six to a page, 
with the capitals in boldface, followed by a short entry 
on the population, government, and other statistics. 
Miranda turned to a pagein the Africa section and went 
down the list. 

"Mali," she asked him. 

"Bamako," he replied instantly. 

"Malawi." 

"Lilongwe." 

She remembered looking at Africa in theMapparium. 
She remembered the fat part of it was green. 

"Go on," Rohin said. 

"Mauritania." 

"Nouakchott." 

"Mauritius." 



Sexy so 114 


He paused, squeezed his eyes shut, then opened 
them, defeated. "I can't remember." 

"Port Louis," shetold him. 

"Port Louis." He began to say it again and again, like 
a chant under his breath. 

When they reached the last of the countries in Africa, 
Rohin said hewanted to watch cartoons, telling M iranda 
to watch them with him. When the cartoons ended, he 
followed her to the kitchen, and stood by her sideas she 
made more coffee. He didn't follow her when she went 
to the bathroom a few minutes later, but when she 
opened the door she was startled to find him standing 
outside. 

"Do you need to go?" 

He shook his head but walked into the bathroom 
anyway. Heput the cover of the toilet down, climbed on 
top of it, and surveyed the narrow glass shelf over the 
sink which held Miranda's toothbrush and makeup. 

"What's this for?" he asked, picking up the sample of 
eye gel she'd gotten the day she met Dev. 

"Puffiness." 

"What's puffi ness?" 

"Here," she explained, pointing. 

"After you've been cryi ng?" 

"I guess so." 

Rohin opened the tube and smelled it. He squeezed a 
drop of it onto a finger, then rubbed it on his hand. "It 
stings." He inspected the back of his hand closely, as if 
expecting it to change color. "My mother has puffiness. 
She says it's a cold but really she cries, sometimes for 
hours. Sometimes straight through dinner. Sometimes 
she cries so hard her eyes puff up like bullfrogs." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES SO 115 


Miranda wondered if she ought to feed him. In the 
kitchen she discovered a bag of rice cakes and some 
lettuce. She offered to go out, to buy something from the 
deli, but Rohin said he wasn't very hungry, and accepted 
one of the rice cakes. "You eat one too,” he said. They sat 
at the table, the rice cakes between them. He turned to a 
fresh pagein his sketch pad. "You draw." 

She selected a blue crayon. "What should I draw?" 

He thought for a moment. "I know," he said. He 
asked her to draw things in the living room: the sofa, the 
director's chairs, the television, the telephone. "Thisway 
I can memorize it." 

"Memorize what?" 

"Our day together." H e reached for another rice cake. 

"Why do you want to memorize it?" 

"Because we're never going to see each other, ever 
again." 

The precision of the phrase startled her. She looked at 
him, feeling slightly depressed. Rohin didn't look 
depressed. Hetapped the page. "Goon." 

And so she drew the items as best as she could — the 
sofa, the director's chairs, the television, the telephone. 
He sidled up to her, so close that it was sometimes 
difficult to see what she was doing. He put his small 
brown hand over hers. "Now me." 

She handed him the crayon. 

He shook his head. "No, now draw me." 

"I can't," she said. "It won't look I ike you " 

The brooding look began to spread across Robin's 
face again, just as it had when she'd refused him coffee. 
"Please?" 

She drew his face, outlining his head and the thick 
fringe of hair. He sat perfectly still, with a formal, 



Sexy ss> 116 


melancholy expression, his gaze fixed to one side. 
Miranda wished she could draw a good likeness. Her 
hand moved in conjunction with her eyes, in unknown 
ways, just as it had that day in the bookstorewhen she'd 
transcribed her name in Bengali letters. It looked nothing 
like him. She was in the middle of drawing his nose 
when he wriggled away from the table. 

"I'm bored," he announced, heading toward her 
bedroom. She heard him opening the door, opening the 
drawers of her bureau and closing them. 

When shejoined him hewas inside the closet. After a 
moment he emerged, his hair disheveled, holding the 
silver cocktail dress. "This was on thefloor." 

"It fal Is off the hanger." 

Rohin looked at the dress and then at Miranda's 
body, "Put it on." 

"Excuse me?" 

"Put it on." 

There was no reason to put it on. Apart from in the 
fitting room at Filene's she had never worn it, and as 
long as she was with Dev she knew she never would. 
She knew they would never go to restaurants, where he 
would reach across a table and kiss her hand. They 
would meet in her apartment, on Sundays, he in his 
sweatpants, she in her jeans. She took the dress from 
Rohin and shook it out, even though the slinky fabric 
never wrinkled. She reached into the closet for a free 
hanger. 

"Please put it on," Rohin asked, suddenly standing 
behind her. Hepressed his face against her, clasping her 
waist with both his thin arms. "Please?" 

"All right," she said, surprised by the strength of his 
grip. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES sa 117 


He smiled, satisfied, and sat on the edge of her bed. 

"You have to wait out there," she said, pointing to the 
door. "I'll come out when I'm ready." 

"But my mother always takes her clothes off in front 
of me." 

"She does?" 

Rohin nodded. "She doesn't even pick them up 
afterward. She leaves them all on the floor by the bed, all 
tangled." 

"One day she slept in my room," he continued. "She 
said it felt better than her bed, now that my father's 
gone." 

"I'm not your mother," Miranda said, lifting him by 
the armpits off her bed. When he refused to stand, she 
picked him up. He was heavier than she expected, and 
he clung to her, his legs wrapped firmly around her 
hips, his head resting against her chest. She set him 
down in the hallway and shut the door. As an extra 
precaution she fastened the latch. She changed into the 
dress, glancing into the full-length mirror nailed to the 
back of thedoor. Her anklesocks looked silly, and so she 
opened a drawer and found the stockings. She searched 
through the back of the closet and slipped on the high 
heels with the tiny buckles. The chain straps of the dress 
were as I i ght as paper cl i ps agai nst her col I arbone. It was 
a bit loose on her. She could not zip it herself. 

Rohin began knocking. "May I come in now?" 

She opened the door. Rohin was holding his almanac 
in his hands, muttering something under his breath. His 
eyes opened wide at the sight of her. "I need help with 
the zipper," she said. She sat on the edge of the bed. 



Sexy ss> 118 


Rohin fastened the zipper to the top, and then 
Miranda stood up and twirled. Rohin put down the 
almanac. "You'resexy," hedeclared. 

"What did you say?" 

"You're sexy." 

Miranda sat down again. Though she knew it meant 
nothing, her heart skipped a beat. Rohin probably 
referred to all women as sexy. He'd probably heard the 
word on television, or seen it on the cover of a magazine. 
She remembered the day in the Mapparium standing 
across the bridge from Dev. At the time she thought she 
knew what his words meant. At the time they made 
sense. 

M iranda folded her arms across her chest and looked 
Rohin in the eyes. "Tell me something." 

He was silent. 

"What does it mean?" 

"What?" 

"That word. 'Sexy.' What does it mean?" 

He looked down, suddenly shy. "I can't tel I you." 

"Why not?" 

"It's a secret." He pressed his lips together, so hard 
that a bit of them went white. 

"Tell me the secret. I want to know." 

Rohin sat on the bed beside Miranda and began to 
kick the edge of the mattress with the backs of his shoes. 
He giggled nervously, his thin body flinching as if it 
were being tickled. 

"Tell me," Miranda demanded. She leaned over and 
gripped his ankles, holding his feet still. 

Rohin looked at her, his eyes like slits. He struggled 
to kick the mattress again. But Miranda pressed against 
him. Hefell back on the bed, his back straight as a board. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 119 


He cupped his hands around his mouth, and then he 
whispered, "It means loving someoneyou don't know." 

Miranda felt Rohin's words under her skin, the same 
way she'd felt Dev's. But instead of going hot she felt 
numb. It reminded her of the way she'd felt at the Indian 
grocery, the moment she knew, without even looking at 
a picture, that Madhuri Dixit, whom Dev's wife 
resembled, was beautiful. 

"That's what my father did," Rohin continued. "He 
sat next to someone he didn't know, someone sexy, and 
now he loves her instead of my mother." 

He took off his shoes and placed them side by side on 
the floor. Then he peeled back the comforter and 
crawled into Miranda's bed with the almanac. A minute 
later the book dropped from his hands, and he closed his 
eyes. Miranda watched him sleep, the comforter rising 
and falling as he breathed. He didn't wake up after 
twelve minutes, like Dev, or even twenty. He didn't 
open his eyes as she stepped out of the silver cocktail 
dress and back into her jeans, and put the high-heeled 
shoes in the back of the closet and rolled up the 
stockings and put them back in her drawer. 

When she had put everything away she sat on the 
bed. She leaned toward him, close enough to see some 
white powder from the rice cakes stuck to the corners of 
his mouth, and picked up the almanac. As she turned 
the pages she imagined the quarrels Rohin had 
overheard in his house in Montreal. "Is she pretty?" his 
mother would have asked his father, wearing the same 
bathrobe she'd worn for weeks, her own pretty face 
turning spiteful. "Is she sexy?" His father would deny it 
at first, try to change the subject. "Tell me," Rohin's 
mother would shriek, "tell me if she's sexy." In the end 



Sexy ss> 120 


his father would admit that she was, and his mother 
would cry and cry, in a bed surrounded by a tangle of 
clothes, her eyes puffing up like bullfrogs. "How could 
you," she'd ask sobbing, "how could you love a woman 
you don't even know?" 

As Miranda imagined the scene she began to cry a 
little herself. In the Mapparium that day, all the 
countries had seemed close enough to touch, and Dev's 
voice had bounced wildly off the glass. From across the 
bridge, thirty feet away, his words had reached her ears, 
so near and full of warmth that they'd drifted for days 
under her skin. Miranda cried harder, unable to stop. 
But Rohin still slept. She guessed that he was used to it 
now, to the sound of a woman crying. 

On Sunday, Dev called to tell Miranda he was on his 
way. "I'm almost ready. I'll be there at two." 

She was watching a cooking show on television. A 
woman pointed to a row of apples, explaining which 
were best for baking. "You shouldn't come today." 

"Why not?" 

"I have a cold," she lied. It wasn't far from the truth; 
crying had left her congested. "I've been in bed all 
morning," 

"You do sound stuffed up." There was a pause. "Do 
you need anything?" 

"I'mall set." 

"Drink lots of fluids." 

"Dev?" 

"Yes, Miranda?" 

"Do you remember that day we went to the 
Mapparium?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 121 


"Of course." 

"Do you remember how we whispered to each 
other?" 

"I remember," Dev whispered playfully. 

"Do you remember what you said?" 

There was a pause. '"Let's go back to your place.'" He 
laughed quietly. "NextSunday, then?" 

The day before, as she'd cried, Miranda had believed 
she would never forget anything — not even the way 
her name looked written in Bengali. She'd fallen asleep 
beside Rohin and when she woke up he was drawing an 
airplane on the copy of The Economist she'd saved 
hidden under the bed. "Who's Devajit Mitra?" he had 
asked, looking at the address label. 

Miranda pictured Dev, in his sweatpants and 
sneakers, laughing into the phone. In a moment he'd join 
his wife downstairs, and tell her he wasn't going 
jogging. He'd pulled a musclewhilestretching, he'd say, 
settling down to read the paper. In spite of herself, she 
longed for him. She would see him one more Sunday, 
she decided, perhaps two. Then she would tell him the 
things she had known all along: that it wasn'tfair to her, 
or to his wife, that they both deserved better, that there 
was no point in it dragging on. 

But the next Sunday it snowed, so much so that Dev 
couldn't tell his wife he was going running along the 
Charles. The Sunday after that, the snow had melted, but 
Miranda made plans to go to the movies with Laxmi, 
and when she told Dev this over the phone, he didn't 
ask her to cancel them. The third Sunday she got up 
early and went out for a walk. It was cold but sunny, 
and so she walked all the way down Commonwealth 
Avenue, past the restaurants where Dev had kissed her, 



Sexy sd 122 


and then shewalked all the way to the Christian Science 
center. The Mapparium was closed, but she bought a 
cup of coffee nearby and sat on one of the benches in the 
plaza outside the church, gazing at its giant pillars and 
its massive dome, and at the clear blue sky spread over 
the city. 



M rs. Sen's 


E liot had been going to Mrs. Sen's for 
nearly a month, ever since school started in 
September. The year before he was looked after by 
a university student named Abby, a slim, freckled girl 
who read books without pictures on their covers, and 
refused to prepare any food for Eliot containing meat. 
Before that an older woman, Mrs. Linden, greeted him 
when he came home each afternoon, sipping coffee from 
a thermos and working on crossword puzzles while 
Eliot played on his own. Abby received her degree and 
moved off to another university, while Mrs. Linden was, 
in the end, fired when Eliot's mother discovered that 
Mrs. Linden's thermos contained more whiskey than 
coffee. Mrs. Sen came to them in tidy ballpoint script, 
posted on an index card outside the supermarket: 
"Professor's wife, responsible and kind, I will care for 
your child in my home." On thetelephone Eliot's mother 
told M rs. Sen that the previous baby-sitters had come to 
their house, "Eliot is eleven. He can feed and entertain 
himself; I just want an adult in the house, in case of an 
emergency." But M rs. Sen did not know how to drive. 


MRS. SEN'S K> 124 


"As you can see, our home is quite dean, quite safe for a 
child," Mrs. Sen had said at their first meeting. It was a 
university apartment located on the fringes of the 
campus. The lobby was tiled in unattractive squares of 
tan, with a row of mailboxes marked with masking tape 
or white labels. Inside, intersecting shadows left by a 
vacuum cleaner were frozen on the surface of a plush 
pear-colored carpet. Mismatched remnants of other 
carpets were positioned in front of the sofa and chairs, 
like individual welcome mats anticipating where a 
person's feet would contact the floor. White drum¬ 
shaped lampshades flanking the sofa were still wrapped 
in the manufacturer's plastic. The TV and the telephone 
were covered by pieces of yellow fabric with scalloped 
edges. Therewas tea in a tall gray pot, along with mugs, 
and butter biscuits on a tray. Mr. Sen, a short, stocky 
man with slightly protuberant eyes and glasses with 
black rectangular frames, had been there, too. He 
crossed his legs with some effort, and held his mug with 
both hands very dose to his mouth, even when he wasn't 
drinking. Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Sen wore shoes; Eliot 
noticed several pairs lined on the shelves of a small 
bookcase by the front door. They wore flip-flops. "Mr. 
Sen teaches mathematics at the university" M rs. Sen had 
said by way of introduction, as if they were only 
distantly acquainted. 

She was about thirty. She had a small gap between 
her teeth and faded pockmarks on her chin, yet her eyes 
were beautiful, with thick, flaring brows and liquid 
flourishes that extended beyond the natural width of the 
lids. She wore a shimmering white sari patterned with 
orange paisleys, more suitable for an evening affair than 
for that quiet, faintly drizzling August afternoon. Her 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES SO 125 


lips were coated in a complementary coral gloss, and a 
bit of the color had strayed beyond the borders. 

Yet it was his mother, Eliot had thought, in her 
cuffed, beige shorts and her rope-soled shoes, who 
looked odd. Her cropped hair, a shade similar to her 
shorts, seemed too lank and sensible, and in that room 
where all things were so carefully covered, her shaved 
knees and thighs too exposed. She refused a biscuit each 
time Mrs. Sen extended the plate in her direction, and 
asked a long series of questions, the answers to which 
she recorded on a steno pad. Would there be other 
children in the apartment? Had Mrs. Sen cared for 
children before? How long had shelived in thiscountry? 
Most of all she was concerned that Mrs. Sen did not 
know how to drive. Eliot's mother worked in an office 
fifty miles north, and his father, the last she had heard, 
lived two thousand miles west. 

"I have been giving her lessons, actually," Mr. Sen 
said, setting his mug on the coffee table. It was the first 
time he had spoken. "By my estimate Mrs. Sen should 
have her driver's license by December." 

"Is that so?" Eliot's mother noted the information on 
her pad. 

"Yes, I am learning," Mrs. Sen said. "Bur I am a slow 
student. At home, you know, we have a driver." 

"You mean a chauffeur?" 

Mrs. Sen glanced at Mr. Sen, who nodded. 

Eliot's mother nodded, too, looking around the room. 
"And that'sall... in India?" 

"Yes," Mrs. Sen replied. The mention of the word 
seemed to release something in her. She neatened the 
border of her sari where it rose diagonally across her 
chest. She, too, looked around the room, as if she noticed 



MRS. SEN'S K> 126 


in the lampshades, in the teapot, in the shadows frozen 
on the carpet, something the rest of them could not. 
"Everything is there." 

Eliot didn't mind going to Mrs. Sen's after school. By 
September the tiny beach house where he and his 
mother lived year-round was already cold; Eliot and his 
mother had to bring a portable heater along whenever 
they moved from one room to another, and to seal the 
windows with plastic sheets and a hair drier. The beach 
was barren and dull to play on alone; the only neighbors 
who stayed on past Labor Day, a young married couple, 
had no children, and Eliot no longer found it interesting 
to gather broken mussel shells in his bucket, or to stroke 
the seaweed, strewn I ike strips of emerald lasagnaon the 
sand. Mrs. Sen's apartment was warm, sometimes too 
warm; the radiators continuously hissed like a pressure 
cooker. Eliotlearned to remove hissneakers first thing in 
M rs. Sen's doorway, and to place them on the bookcase 
next to a row of Mrs. Sen's slippers, each a different 
color, with soles as flat as card board and a ring of leather 
to hold her big toe. 

He especially enjoyed watching Mrs. Sen as she 
chopped things, seated on newspapers on the living 
room floor. Instead of a knife she used a blade that 
curved like the prow of a Viking ship, sailing to battle in 
distant seas. The blade was hinged at one end to a 
narrow wooden base. The steel, more black than silver, 
lacked a uniform polish, and had a serrated crest, she 
told Eliot, for grating. Each afternoon Mrs. Sen lifted the 
blade and locked it into place, so that it met the base at 
an angle. Facing the sharp edge without ever touching it, 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 127 


she took whole vegetables between her hands and 
hacked them apart: cauliflower, cabbage, butternut 
squash. She split things in half, then quarters, speedily 
producing florets, cubes, slices, and shreds. She could 
peel a potato in seconds. At times she sat cross-legged, at 
times with legs splayed, surrounded by an array of 
colanders and shallow bowls of water in which she 
immersed her chopped ingredients. 

While she worked she kept an eye on the television 
and an eye on El iot, but she never seemed to keep an eye 
on the blade. Nevertheless she refused to let Eliot walk 
around when she was chopping. "Just sit, sit please, it 
will take just two more minutes,” she said, pointing to 
the sofa, which was draped at all times with a green and 
black bedcover printed with tows of elephants bearing 
palanquins or their backs. The daily procedure took 
about an hour. In order to occupy Eliot she supplied him 
with the comics section of the newspaper, and crackers 
spread with peanut butter, and sometimes a popsicle, or 
carrot sticks sculpted with her blade. She would have 
roped off the area if she could. Once, though, she broke 
her own rule, in need of additional supplies, and 
reluctant to rise from the catastrophic mess that 
barricaded her, she asked Eliot to fetch something from 
the kitchen. "If you don't mind, there is a plastic bowl, 
large enough to hold this spinach, in the cabinet next to 
thefridge. Careful, oh dear, be careful," she cautioned as 
he approached. "Just leave it, thank you, on the coffee 
table, I can reach." 

She had brought the blade from India, where 
apparently there was at least one in every household. 
"Whenever there is a wedding in the family," she told 
Eliot one day, "or a large celebration of any kind, my 



MRS. SEN'S K> 128 


mother sends out word in the evening for all the 
neighborhood women to bring blades just like this one, 
and then they sit in an enormous circle on the roof of our 
building, laughing and gossiping and slicing fifty kilos 
of vegetables through the night." Her profile hovered 
protectively over her work, a confetti of cucumber, 
eggplant, and onion skins heaped around her. "It is 
impossible to fall asleep those nights, listening to their 
chatter." She paused to look at a pine tree framed by the 
living room window "Here, in this place where Mr. Sen 
has brought me, I cannot sometimes sleep in so much 
silence." 

Another day she sat prying the pimpled yellow fat off 
chicken parts, then dividing them between thigh and leg. 
As the bones cracked apart over the blade her golden 
bangles jostled, her forearms glowed, and she exhaled 
audibly through her nose. At one point she paused, 
gripping the chicken with both hands, and stared out the 
window. Fat and sinew clung to her fingers. 

"Eliot, if I began to scream right now at the top of my 
lungs, would someone come?" 

"M rs. Sen, what's wrong?" 

"Nothing. I am only asking if someonewould come." 

Eliot shrugged. "Maybe." 

"At home that is all you have to do. Not everybody 
has a telephone but just raise your voice a bit, or express 
grief or joy of any kind, and one whole neighborhood 
and half of another has come to share the news, to help 
with arrangements." 

By then Eliot understood that when Mrs. Sen said 
home, she meant India, not the apartment where she sat 
chopping vegetables. He thought of his own home, just 
five miles away, and the young married couple who 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 129 


waved from time to time as they jogged at sunset along 
the shore. On Labor Day they'd had a party. People were 
piled on the deck, eating, drinking, the sound of their 
laughter rising above the weary sigh of the waves, Eliot 
and his mother weren't invited. It was one of the rare 
days his mother had off, but they didn't go anywhere. 
She did the laundry, and balanced the checkbook, and, 
with Eliot's help, vacuumed the inside of the car. Eliot 
had suggested that they go through the car wash a few 
miles down the road as they did every now and then, so 
that they could sit inside, safe and dry, as soap and 
water and a circle of giant canvas ribbons slapped the 
windshield, but his mother said she was too tired, and 
sprayed the car with a hose. When, by evening, the 
crowd on the neighbors' deck began dancing, she looked 
up their number in the phone book and asked them to 
keep it down. 

"They might call you." Eliot said eventually to Mrs. 
Sen. "But they might complain that you were making 
too much noise." 

From where Eliot sat on the sofa he could detect her 
curious scent of mothballs and cumin, and he could see 
the perfectly centered part in her braided hair, which 
was shaded with crushed vermilion and therefore 
appeared to be blushing. At first Eliot had wondered if 
she had cut her scalp, or if something had bitten her 
there. But then one day he saw her standing before the 
bathroom mirror, solemnly applying, with the head of a 
thumbtack, a fresh stroke of scarlet powder, which she 
stored i n a smal I jam jar. A few grai ns of the powder fel I 
onto the bridge of her noseas she used the thumbtack to 
stamp a dot above her eyebrows. "I must wear the 
powder every day," she explained when Eliot asked her 



MRS. SEN'S K> 130 


what it was for, "for the rest of the days that I am 
married." 

"Like a wedding ring, you mean?" 

"Exactly, Eliot, exactly likea wedding ring. Only with 
no fear of losing it in the dishwater." 

By the time Eliot's mother arrived at twenty past six, 
Mrs. Sen always made sure all evidence of her chopping 
was disposed of. The blade was scrubbed, rinsed, dried, 
folded, and stowed away in a cupboard with the aid of a 
stepladder. With Eliot's help the newspapers were 
crushed with all the peel and seeds and skins inside 
them. Brimming bowls and colanders lined the 
countertop, spices and pastes were measured and 
blended, and eventually a collection of broths simmered 
over periwinkle flames on the stove. It was never a 
special occasion, nor was she ever expecting company. It 
was merely dinner for herself and M r. Sen, as indicated 
by the two plates and two glasses she set, without 
napkins or silverware, on the square Formica table at 
one end of the living room. 

As he pressed the newspapers deeper into the 
garbage pail, Sen adjust the driver's seat, the rearview 
mirror, the sunglasses on top of her head. She tuned the 
radio to a station that played symphonies. "Is it 
Beethoven?" she asked once, pronouncing the first part 
of the composer's name not "bay," but "bee," like the 
insect. She rolled down the window on her side, and 
asked Eliot to do the same. Eventually she pressed her 
foot to the brake pedal, manipulated the automatic gear 
shift as if it were an enormous, leaky pen, and backed 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 131 


inch by inch out of the parking space. She circled the 
apartment complex once, then once again. 

"How ami doing, Eliot? Am I going to pass?" 

She was continuously distracted. She stopped the car 
without warning to listen to something on the radio, or 
to stare at something, anything, in the road. If she passed 
a person, she waved. If she saw a bird twenty feet in 
front of her, she beeped the horn with her index finger 
and waited for it to fly away. In India, she said, the 
driver sat on the right side, not the left. Slowly they crept 
past the swing set, the laundry building, the dark green 
trash bins, the rows of parked cars. Each time they 
approached the grove of pine trees where the asphalt 
loop met the main road, she leaned forward, pinning all 
her weight against the brake as cars hurtled past. It was 
a narrow road painted with a solid yellow stripe, with 
onelaneof traffic in either direction. 

"Impossible, Eliot. How can I go there?" 

"You need to wait until no one's coming." 

"Why will not anybody slow down?" 

"No one's coming now." 

"But what about the car from the right, do you see? 
And look, a truck is behind it. Anyway, I am not allowed 
on the mai n road without M r. Sen." 

"You have to turn and speed up fast," Eliot said. That 
was the way his mother did it, as if without thinking. It 
seemed so simple when he sat beside his mother, gliding 
in the evenings back to the beach house. Then the road 
was just a road, the other cars merely part of the scenery. 
But when he sat with Mrs. Sen, under an autumn sun 
that glowed without warmth through the trees, he saw 
how that same stream of cars made her knuckles pale, 
her wrists tremble, and her English falter. 



MRS. SEN'S K> 132 


"Everyone, this people, too much in their world." 

Two things, Eliot learned, made Mrs. Sen happy. One 
was the arrival of a letter from her family. It was her 
custom to check the mailbox after driving practice. She 
would unlock the box, but she would ask Eliot to reach 
inside, telling him what to look for, and then she would 
shut her eyes and shield them with her hands while he 
shuffled through the bills and magazines that came in 
Mr. Sen's name. At first Eliot found Mrs. Sen's anxiety 
incomprehensible; his mother had a p.o. box in town, 
and she collected mail so infrequently that once their 
electricity was cut off for three days. Weeks passed at 
Mrs. Sen's before he found a blue aerogram, grainy to 
the touch, crammed with stamps showing a bald man at 
a spinning wheel, and blackened by postmarks. 

"Is this it, Mrs. Sen?" 

For the first time she embraced him, clasping his face 
to her sari, surrounding him with her odor of mothballs 
and cumin. She seized theletter from his hands. 

As soon as they were in side the apartment she kicked 
off her slippers this way and that, drew a wire pin from 
her hair, and slit the top and sides of the aerogram in 
three strokes. Her eyes darted back and forth as she 
read. As soon as she was finished, she cast aside the 
embroidery that covered the telephone, dialed, and 
asked, "Yes, is M r. Sen there, please? It is M rs. Sen and it 
is very important." 

Subsequently she spoke in her own language, rapid 
and riotous to Eliot's ears; it was clear that she was 
reading the contents of the letter, word by word. As she 
read her voice was louder and seemed to shift in key. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 133 


Though she stood plainly before him, Eliot had the 
sensation that Mrs. Sen was no longer present in the 
room with the pear-colored carpet. 

Afterward the apartment was suddenly too small to 
contain her. They crossed the main road and walked a 
short distance to the university quadrangle, where bells 
in a stone tower chimed on the hour. They wandered 
through the student union, and dragged a tray together 
along the cafeteria ledge, and ate french fries heaped in a 
cardboard boat among students chatting at circular 
tables. Eliot drank soda from a paper cup, Mrs. Sen 
steeped a tea bag with sugar and cream. After eating 
they explored the art building, looking at sculptures and 
silk screens in cool corridors thick with the fragrance of 
wet paint and clay. They walked past the mathematics 
building, where Mr. Sen taught his classes. 

They ended up in the noisy, chlorine-scented wing of 
the athletic building where, through a wide window on 
the fourth floor, they watched swimmers crossing from 
end to end in glaring turquoise pools. M rs. Sen took the 
aerogram from India out of her purse and studied the 
front and back. She unfolded it and reread to herself, 
sighing every now and then. When she had finished she 
gazed for some time at the swimmers. 

"My sister has had a baby girl. By the time I see her, 
depending if Mr. Sen gets his tenure, she will be three 
years old. Her own auntwill beastranger. If wesitside 
by side on a train she will not know my face." She put 
away the letter, then placed a hand on Eliot's held. "Do 
you miss your mother, Eliot, these afternoons with me?" 

The thought had never occurred to him. 



MRS. SEN'S K> 134 


"You must miss her. When I think of you, only a boy, 
separated from your mother for so much of the day, I am 
ashamed." 

"I see her at night." 

"When I was your age I was without knowing that 
one day I would be so far. You are wiser than that, Eliot. 
You al ready taste the way thi ngs must be." 

The other thing that made M rs. Sen happy was fish from 
the seaside. It was always a whole fish she desired, not 
shellfish, or the fillets Eliot's mother had broiled one 
night a few months ago when she'd invited a man from 
her office to dinner — a man who'd spent the night in 
his mother's bedroom, but whom Eliot never saw again. 
One evening when Eliot's mother came to pick him up, 
Mrs. Sen served her a tuna croquette, explaining that it 
was really supposed to bemadewith afish called bhetki. 
"It is very frustrating," Mrs. Sen apologized, with an 
emphasis on the second syllable of the word, "To live so 
close to the ocean and not to have so much fish." In the 
summer, she said, she liked to go to a market by the 
beach. She added that whilethefish there tasted nothing 
like the fish in India, at least it was fresh. Now that it 
was getting colder, the boats were no longer going out 
regularly, and sometimes there was no whole fish 
avai I abl e for weeks at a ti me. 

"Try the supermarket," his mother suggested. 

Mrs. Sen shook her head. "In the supermarket I can 
feed a cat thirty-two dinners from one of thirty-two tins, 
but I can never find a single fish I like, never a single." 
M rs. Sen said she had grown up eating fish twice a day. 
She added that in Calcutta people ate fish first thing in 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES SO 135 


the morning, last thing before bed, as a snack after 
school if they were lucky. They ate the tail, the eggs, 
even the head. It was available in any market, at any 
hour, from dawn until midnight. "All you have to do is 
leave the house and walk a bit, and there you are." 

Every few days Mrs. Sen would open up the yellow 
pages, dial a number that she had ticked in the margin, 
and ask if there was any whole fish available. If so, she 
would ask the market to hold it. "Under Sen, yes, S as in 
Sam. N as in New York. Mr. Sen will be there to pick it 
up." Then she would call Mr. Sen at the university, A 
few minutes later Mr. Sen would arrive, patting Eliot on 
the head but not kissing Mrs. Sen. He read his mail at the 
Formica table and drank a cup of tea before heading out; 
half an hour later he would return, carrying a paper bag 
with a smiling lobster drawn on thefront of it, and hand 
it to Mrs. Sen, and head back to the university to teach 
his evening class. One day, when he handed Mrs. Sen 
the paper bag, he said, "No more fish for a while. Cook 
the chicken in the freezer. I need to start holding office 
hours." 

For the next few days, instead of calling the fish 
market, Mrs. Sen thawed chicken legs in the kitchen sink 
and chopped them with her blade. One day she made a 
stew with green beans and tinned sardines. But the 
following week the man who ran the fish market called 
Mrs. Sen; he assumed she wanted the fish, and said he 
would hold it until the end of the day under her name. 
She was flattered. "Isn't that nice of him, Eliot? The man 
said he looked up my name in the telephone book. He 
said there is only one Sen. Do you know how many Sens 
are in the Calcutta telephone book?" 



MRS. SEN'S K> 136 


She told Eliot to put on his shoes and his jacket, and 
then she called Mr. Sen at the university. Eliot tied his 
sneakers by the bookcase and waited for her to join him, 
to choose from her row of slippers. After a few minutes 
he called out her name. When Mrs. Sen did not reply, he 
untied his sneakers and returned to the living room, 
where he found her on the sofa, weeping. Her face was 
in her hands and tears dripped through her fingers. 
Through them she murmured something about a 
meeting Mr. Sen was required to attend. Slowly she 
stood up and rearranged the cloth over the telephone. 
Eliot followed her, walking for the first time in his 
sneakers across the pear-colored carpet. She stared at 
him. Her lower eyelids were swollen into thin pink 
crests. "Tell me, Eliot, is it too much to ask?" 

Before he could answer, she took him by the hand 
and led him to the bedroom, whose door was normally 
kept shut. Apart from the bed, which lacked a 
head board, the on I y other th i n gs i n th e room w ere a si d e 
table with a telephone on it, an ironing board, and a 
bureau. She flung open the drawers of the bureau and 
the door of the closet, filled with saris of every 
imaginable texture and shade, brocaded with gold and 
silver threads. Some were transparent, tissuethin, others 
as thick as drapes, with tassels knotted along the edges. 
In the closet they were on hangers, in the drawers they 
were folded flat, or wound tightly like thick scrolls. She 
sifted through the drawers, letting saris spill over the 
edges. "When have I ever worn this one? And this? And 
this?" She tossed the saris one by one from the drawers, 
then pried several from their hangers. They landed I ike a 
pile of tangled sheets on the bed. The room was filled 
with an intense smell of mothballs. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 137 


'"Send pictures,' they write. 'Send pictures of your 
new life.' What picture can I send?" She sat, exhausted, 
on the edge of the bed, where there was now barely 
room for her. "They think I live the life of a queen, 
Eliot." She looked around the blank walls of the room. 
"They think I press buttons and the house is clean. They 
think I live in a palace." 

The phone rang. Mrs. Sen let it ring several times 
before picking up the extension by the bed. During the 
conversation she seemed only to be replying to things, 
and wiping her face with the ends of one of the saris. 
When she got off the phone she stuffed the saris without 
folding them back into the drawers, and then she and 
Eliot put on their shoes and went to the car, where they 
waited for M r. Sen to meet them. 

"Why don't you drive today?" Mr. Sen asked when 
he appeared, rapping on the hood of the car with his 
knuckles. They always spoke to each other in English 
when Eliot was present. 

"Nottoday. Another day," 

"How do you expect to pass the test if you refuse to 
drive on a road with other cars?" 

"Eliot is here tod ay." 

"He is here every day. It's for your own good, Eliot, 
tell M rs. Sen it's for her own good-" 

She refused. 

They drove in silence, along the same roads that Eliot 
and his mother took back to the beach house each 
evening. But in the back seat of Mr. and Mrs. Sen's car 
the ride seemed unfamiliar, and took longer than usual. 
The gulls whose tedious cries woke him each morning 
now thrilled him as they dipped and flapped across the 
sky. They passed one beach after another, and the 



MRS. SEN'S K> 138 


shacks, now locked up, that sold frozen lemonade and 
quahogsin summer. Only one of the shacks was open. It 
was the fish market. 

Mrs. Sen unlocked her door and turned toward Mr. 
Sen, who had not yet unfastened his seat belt. "Are you 
comi ng?" 

Mr. Sen handed her some bills from his wallet. "I 
have a meeting in twenty minutes," he said, staring at 
the dashboard as he spoke. "PI ease don't waste time." 

Eliot accompanied her into the dank little shop, 
whose walls were festooned with nets and starfish and 
buoys. A group of tourists with cameras around their 
necks huddled by the counter, some sampling stuffed 
clams, others pointing to a large chart illustrating fifty 
different varieties of N orth Atlantic fish. M rs. Sen took a 
ticket from the machine at the counter and waited in 
line. Eliot stood by the lobsters, which stirred one on top 
of another in their murky tank, their claws bound by 
yellow rubber bands. He watched as Mrs. Sen laughed 
and chatted, when it was her turn in line, with a man 
with a bright red face and yellow teeth, dressed in a 
black rubber apron. In either hand he held a mackerel by 
the tail. 

"You are sure what you sell me is very fresh?" 

"Any fresher and they'd answer that question 
themselves." 

The dial shivered toward its verdict on the scale. 

"You want this cleaned, Mrs. Sen?" 

She nodded. "Leavethe heads on, please." 

"You got cats at home?" 

"No cats. Only a husband." 

Later, in the apartment, she pulled the blade out of 
the cupboard, spread newspapers across the carpet, and 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 139 


inspected her treasures. One by one she drew them from 
the paper wrapping, wrinkled and tinged with blood. 
She stroked the tails, prodded the bellies, pried apart the 
gutted flesh. With a pair of scissors she clipped the fins. 
She tucked a finger under the gills, a red so bright they 
made her vermilion seem pale. She grasped the body, 
lined with inky streaks, at either end, and notched it at 
i nterval s agai nst the bl ade. 

"Why do you do that?" Eliot asked. 

"To see how many pieces. If I cut properly, from this 
fish I will get three meals." She sawed off the head and 
set it on a pie plate. 

In November came a series of days when Mrs. Sen 
refused to practice driving. The blade never emerged 
from the cupboard, newspapers were not spread on the 
floor. She did not call the fish store, nor did she thaw 
chicken. In silence she prepared crackers with peanut 
butter for Eliot, then sat reading old aerograms from a 
shoebox. When it was time for Eliot to leave she 
gathered together his things without inviting his mother 
to sit on the sofa and eat something first. When 
eventually his mother asked him in the car if he'd 
noticed a change in Mrs. Sen's behaviour, he said he 
hadn't. He didn't tell her that Mrs. Sen paced the 
apartment, staring at the plastic-covered lampshades as 
if noticing them for the first time. He didn't tell her she 
switched on the television but never watched it, or that 
she made herself tea but let it grow cold on the coffee 
table. Oneday she played a tape of something she called 
a raga; it sounded a little bit like someone plucking very 
slowly and then very quickly on a violin, and Mrs. Sen 



MRS. SEN'S K> 140 


said it was supposed to be heard only in the late 
afternoon, as the sun was setting. As the music played, 
for nearly an hour, she sat on the sofa with her eyes 
dosed. Afterward she said, "It is more sad even than 
your Beethoven, isn't it?" Another day she played a 
cassette of people talking in her language — a farewell 
present, she told Eliot, that her family had madefor her. 
As the succession of voices laughed and said their bit, 
Mrs. Sen identified each speaker. "My third uncle, my 
cousin, my father, my grandfather." One speaker sang a 
song. Another recited a poem. The final voice on the tape 
belonged to Mrs. Sen's mother. It was quieter and 
sounded more serious than the others. There was a 
pause between each sentence, and during this pause 
M rs. Sen translated for Eliot: "The price of goat rose two 
rupees. The mangoes at the market are not very sweet. 
College Street is flooded." She turned off the tape. 
"These are things that happened the day I left India." 
The next day she pi ayed the same cassette al I over agai n. 
This time, when her grandfather was speaking she 
stopped the tape. She told Eliot she'd received a letter 
over the weekend. Her grand father was dead. 

A week later Mrs. Sen began cooking again. One day as 
she sat slicing cabbage on the living room floor, M r. Sen 
called. He wanted to take Eliot and Mrs. Sen to the 
seaside. For the occasion M rs. Sen put on a red sari and 
red lipstick; she freshened the vermilion in her part and 
rebraided her hair. She knotted a scarf under her chin, 
arranged her sunglasses on top of her head, and put a 
pocket camera in her purse. As M r. Sen backed out of the 
parking lot, he put his arm across the top of the front 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 141 


seat, so that it looked is if he had his arm around Mrs, 
Sen. "It's getting too cold for that top coat,” he said to 
her at one point. "We should get you something 
warmer." At the shop they bought mackerel, and 
butterfish, and sea bass. This time M r. Sen came into the 
shop with them. It was Mr. Sen who asked whether the 
fish was fresh and to cut it this way or that way. They 
bought so much fish that Eliot had to hold one of the 
bags. After they put the bags in the trunk, Mr. Sen 
announced that he was hungry, and Mrs. Sen agreed, so 
they crossed the street to a restaurant where the take-out 
window was still open. They sat at a picnic table and ate 
two baskets of clam cakes. Mrs. Sen put a good deal of 
Tabasco sauce and black pepper on hers. "Like pakoras, 
no?" Her face was flushed, her lipstick faded, and she 
laughed at everything M r. Sen said. 

Behind the restaurant was a small beach, and when 
they were done eating they walked for a whilealong the 
shore, into a wind so strong that they had to walk 
backward. Mrs. Sen pointed to the water, and said that 
at a certain moment, each wave resembled a sari drying 
on a clothesline. "Impossible!" she shouted eventually, 
laughing as she turned back, her eyes teary. "I cannot 
move." Instead she took a picture of Eliot and Mr. Sen 
standing on the sand. "Now one of us," she said, 
pressing Eliot against her checkered coat and giving the 
camera to Mr. Sen. Finally the camera was given to Eliot. 
"Hold it steady," said Mr. Sen. Eliot looked through the 
tiny window in the camera and waited for Mr. and Mrs. 
Sen to move closer together, but they didn't. They didn't 
hold hands or put their arms around each other's waists. 
Both smiled with their mouths closed, squinting into the 



MRS. SEN'S K> 142 


wind, Mrs. Sen's red sari leaping like flames under her 
coat. 

In the car, warm at last and exhausted from the wind 
and the clam cakes, they admired the dunes, the ships 
they could see in the distance, the view of the lighthouse, 
the peach and purple sky. After a while Mr. Sen slowed 
down and stopped by the side of the road. 

"What'swrong?" Mrs. Sen asked. 

"You are going to drive home today." 

"Not today." 

"Yes, today." Mr. Sen stepped out of the car and 
opened the door on M rs. Sen's side. A fierce wind blew 
into the car, accompanied by the sound of waves 
crashing on the shore. Finally she slid over to the 
driver's side, but spent a long time adjusting her sari and 
her sunglasses. Eliot turned and looked through the back 
window. The road was empty. Mrs. Sen turned on the 
radio, filling up the car with violin music. 

"There's no need." Mr. Sen said, clicking it off. 

"It helps me to concentrate," Mrs. Sen said, and 
turned the radio on again. 

"Put on your signal," Mr. Sen directed. 

"I know what to do." 

For about a mile she was fine, though far slower than 
the other cars that passed her. But when the town 
approached, and traffic lights loomed on wires in the 
distance, she went even slower. 

"Switch lanes," Mr. Sen said. "You will have to bear 
I eft at the rotary." 

Mrs. Sen did not. 

"Switch lanes, I tell you." He shut off the radio. "Are 
you listening to me?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 143 


A car beeped its horn, then another. She beeped 
defiantly in response, stopped, then pulled without 
signaling to the side of the road. "No more," she said, 
her forehead resting against the top of the steering 
wheel. "I hate it. I hatedriving. I won't go on." 

She stopped driving after that. The next time the fish- 
store cal I ed she d i d not cal I M r. Sen at hi s offi ce. She had 
decided to try something new. There was a town bus 
that ran on an hourly schedule between the university 
and the seaside. After the university it made two stops, 
fi rst at a nursi ng home, then at a shopping pi aza w ithout 
a name, which consisted of a bookstore, a shoe store, a 
drugstore, a pet store, and a record store. On benches 
under the portico, elderly women from the nursing 
home sat in pairs, in knee-length overcoats with 
oversized buttons, eating lozenges. 

"Eliot," Mrs. Sen asked him while they were sitting 
on the bus, "will you putyour mother in a nursing home 
when she is old?" 

"Maybe," he said. "But I would visit every day." 

"You say that now, but you will see, when you are a 
man your life will be in places you cannot know now." 
She counted on her fingers: "You will have a wife, and 
children of your own, and they will want to be driven to 
different places at the same time. No matter how kind 
they are, one day they will complain about visiting your 
mother, and you will get tired of it too, Eliot. You will 
miss one day, and another, and then she will have to 
drag herself onto a bus just to get herself a bag of 
lozenges." 



MRS. SEN'S K> 144 


At the fish shop the ice beds were nearly empty, as 
were the lobster tanks, where rust-colored stains were 
visible through the water. A sign said the shop would be 
closing for winter at the end of the month. There was 
only one person working behind the counter, a young 
boy who did not recognize M rs. Sen as he handed her a 
bag reserved under her name. 

"Has it been cleaned and scaled?" Mrs. Sen asked. 

The boy shrugged. "My boss left early. Hejustsaidto 
give you this bag." 

In the parking lot Mrs. Sen consulted the bus 
schedule. They would have to wait forty-five minutes for 
the next one, and so they crossed the street and bought 
clam cakes at the take-out window they had been before. 
There was no place to sit. The picnic tables were no 
longer in use, their benches chained upsidedown on top 
of them. 

On the way home an old woman on the bus kept 
watching them, her eyes shifting from Mrs. Sen to Eliot 
to the blood-lined bag between their feet. She wore a 
black overcoat, and in her lap she held, with gnarled, 
colorless hands, a crisp white bag from the drugstore. 
The only other passenger were two college students, 
boyfriend and girlfriend, wearing matching sweatshirts, 
their fingers linked, slouched in the back seat. In silent 
El i ot and M rs. Sen ate the I ast few cl am cakes i n the bag. 
Mrs. Sen had forgotten napkins, and traces of fried 
butter dotted the corners of her mouth. When they 
reached the nursing home the woman in the overcoat 
stood up, said something to the driver, then stepped off 
the bus. The driver turned his head and glanced back to 
Mrs. Sen. "What's in the bag?" 

M rs. Sen looked up, startled. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 145 


"Speak English?" The bus began to move again, 
causing the driver to look at Mrs. Sen and Eliot in his 
enormous rearview mirror. 

"Yes, I can speak." 

"Then what's in the bag?" 

"A fish," M rs. Sen replied. 

"The smell seems to be bothering the other 
passengers. Kid, maybe you should open her window or 
something." 

One afternoon a few days later the phone rang. Some 
very tasty halibut had arrived on the boats. Would Mrs. 
Sen like to pick one up? She called Mr. Sen, but he was 
not at his desk. A second time she tried calling, then a 
third. Eventually she went to the kitchen and returned to 
the living room with the blade, an eggplant, and some 
newspapers. Without having to be told Eliot took his 
place on the sofa and watched as she si iced the stems off 
the eggplant. She divided it into long, slender strips, 
then into small squares, smaller and smaller, as small as 
sugar cubes. 

"I am going to put these in a very tasty stew with fish 
and green bananas," she announced. "Only I will have to 
do without the green bananas." 

"A re we going to get the fish?" 

"We are going to get the fish." 

"Is Mr. Sen going to take us?' 

"Put on your shoes." 

They left the apartment without cleaning up. Outside 
it was so cold that Eliot could feel the chill on his teeth. 
They got in the car, and Mrs. Sen drove around the 
asphalt loop several times. Each time she paused by the 



MRS. SEN'S K> 146 


grove of pine trees to observe the traffic on the main 
road. Eliot thought she was just practicing while they 
waited for Mr. Sen. But then she gave a signal and 
turned. 

The accident occurred quickly. After about a mile 
M rs. Sen took a left before she should have, and though 
the oncoming car managed to swerve out of her way, she 
was so startled by the horn that she lost control of the 
wheel and hit a telephone pole on the opposite corner. A 
policeman arrived and asked to see her license, but she 
did not have one to show him. "Mr. Sen teaches 
mathematics at the university" was all she said by way 
of explanation. 

The damage was slight. Mrs. Sen cut her lip, Eliot 
complained briefly of a pain in his ribs, and the car's 
fender would have to be straightened. The policeman 
thought M rs. Sen had also cut her scalp, but it was only 
the vermilion. When Mr. Sen arrived, driven by one of 
his colleagues, he spoke at length with the policeman as 
he filled out some forms, but he said nothing to Mrs. Sen 
as he drove them back to the apartment. When they got 
out of the car, Mr. Sen patted Eliot's head. "The 
policeman said you were lucky. Very lucky to come out 
without a scratch." 

After taking off her slippers and putting them on the 
bookcase, Mrs. Sen put away the blade that was still on 
the living room floor and threw the eggplant pieces and 
the newspapers into the garbage pail. She prepared a 
plate of crackers with peanut butter, placed them on the 
coffee table, and turned on the television for Eliot's 
benefit. "If he is still hungry give him a Popsidefrom 
the box in the freezer," she said to M r. Sen, who sat at 
the Formica table sorting through the mail. Then she 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 147 


went into her bedroom and shut the door. When Eliot's 
mother arrived at quarter to six, Mr. Sen told her the 
details of the accident and offered a check reimbursing 
November's payment. As he wrote out the check he 
apologized on behalf of Mrs. Sen. He said she was 
resting, though when Eliot had gone to the bathroom 
he'd heard her crying. H is mother was satisfied with the 
arrangement, and in sense, she confessed to Eliot as they 
drove home, she was relieved. It was the last afternoon 
Eliot spent with M rs. Sen, or with any baby-sitter. From 
then on his mother gave him a key, which he wore on a 
string around his neck. He was to call the neighbors in 
case of an emergency, and to let himself into the beach 
house after school. Thefirst day, just as hewas taking off 
his coat, the phone rang. It was his mother calling from 
her office. "You're a big boy now, Eliot," she told him. 
"You okay?" Eliot looked out the kitchen window, at 
gray waves receding from the shore, and said that he 
was fine. 



This Blessed H ouse 


T hey discovered the first one in a cupboard 
above the stove, besidean unopened bottleof malt 
vinegar. "Guess what I found.” Twinkle walked 
into the living room, lined from end to end with taped- 
up picking boxes, waving the vinegar in one hand and a 
white porcelain effigy of Christ, roughly the same size as 
the vinegar bottle, in the other. 

Sanjeev looked up. He was kneeling on the floor, 
marking, with ripped bits of a Post-it, patches on the 
baseboard that needed to be retouched with paint. 
"Throw it away." 

"Which?" 

"Both." 

"But I can cook something with the vinegar. It's 
brand-new." 

"You've never cooked anything with vinegar." 

"I'll look something up. In one of those books we got 
for our wedding." 

Sanjeev turned back to the baseboard, to replace a 
Post-it scrap that had fallen to the floor, "Check the 
expiration. And at the very least get rid of that idiotic 
statue." 

"But it could be worth something. Who knows?" She 
turned it upside down, then stroked, with her index 


INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 149 


finger, the minuscule frozen folds of its robes. "It's 
pretty." 

"We're not Christian," Sanjeev said. Lately he had 
begun noticing the need to state the obvious to Twinkle. 
The day before he had to tell her that if she dragged her 
end of the bureau instead of lifting it, the parquet floor 
would scratch. 

She shrugged. "No, we're not Christian. We're good 
little Hindus." She planted a kiss on top of Christ's head, 
then placed the statue on top of the fireplace mantel, 
which needed, Sanjeev observed, to bedusted. 

By the end of the week the mantel had still not been 
dusted; it had, however, come to serve as the display 
shelf for a sizable collection of Christian paraphernalia. 
There was a 3-D postcard of Saint Francis done in four 
colors, which Twinkle had found taped to the back of the 
medicine cabinet, and a wooden cross key chain, which 
Sanjeev had stepped on with bare feet as he was 
installing extra shelving in Twinkle's study. There was a 
framed paint-by-number of thethree wise men, against a 
black velvet background, tucked in the linen closet. 
There was also a tile trivet depicting a blond, unbearded 
Jesus, delivering a sermon on a mountaintop, left in one 
of the drawers of the built in china cabinet in the dining 
room. 

"Do you think the previous owners were born- 
agains?" asked Twinkle, making room the next day for a 
small plastic snow-filled dome containing a miniature 
Nativity scene, found behind the pipes of the kitchen 
sink. 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 150 


Sanjeev was organizing his engineering texts from 
MIT in alphabetical order on a bookshelf, though it had 
been several years since he had needed to consult any of 
them. After graduating, he moved from Boston to 
Connecticut, to work for a firm near Hartford, and he 
had recently learned that he was being considered for 
the position of vice president. At thirty-three he had a 
secretary of his own and a dozen people working under 
his supervision who gladly supplied him with any 
information he needed. Still, the presence of his college 
books in the room reminded him of a time in his life he 
recalled with fondness, when he would walk each 
evening across the Mass. Avenue bridge to order 
Mughlai chicken with spinach from his favorite Indian 
restaurant on the other side of the Charles, and return to 
his dorm to write out clean copies of his problem sets. 

"Or perhaps it's an attempt to convert people," 
Twinkle mused. 

"Clearly the scheme has succeeded in your case." 

She disregarded him, shaking the little plastic dome 
so that the snow swirled over the manger. 

He studied the items on the mantel. It puzzled him 
that each was in its own way so silly. Clearly they lacked 
a sense of sacredness. He was further puzzled that 
Twinkle, who normally displayed good taste, was so 
charmed. These objects meant something to Twinkle, but 
they meant nothing to him. They irritated him. "We 
should call the Realtor. Tell him there's all this nonsense 
left behind. Tell him to take it away." 

"Oh, Sanj." Twinkle groaned. "Please. I would feel 
terrible throwing them away. Obviously they were 
important to the people who used to live here. It would 
feel, I don't know, sacrilegious or something." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 151 


"If they're so precious, then why are they hidden all 
over the house? Why didn't they take them with them? 

"There must be others," Twinkle said. Her eyes 
roamed the bare off-white walls of the room, as if there 
were other things concealed behind the plaster. "What 
elsedoyou think we'll find?" 

But as they unpacked their boxes and hung up their 
winter clothes and the silk paintings of elephant 
processions bought on their honeymoon in Jaipur, 
Twinkle, much to her dismay, could not find a thing. 
Nearly a week had passed before they discovered, one 
Saturday afternoon, a larger-than-life-sized watercolor 
poster of Christ, weeping translucent tears the size of 
peanut shells and sporting a crown of thorns, rolled up 
behind a radiator in the guest bedroom. Sanjeev had 
mistaken itfor a window shade. 

"Oh, we must, we simply must put it up. It's too 
spectacular." Twinkle lit a cigarette and began to smoke 
it with relish, waving it around Sanjeev's head as if it 
were a conductor's baton as Mahler's Fifth Symphony 
roared from the stereo downstairs. 

"Now, look. I will tolerate, for now, your little biblical 
menagerie in the living room. But I refuse to have this," 
he said, flicking at one of the painted peanut-tears, 
"displayed in our home." 

Twinkle stared at him, placidly exhaling, the smoke 
emerging in two thin blue streams from her nostrils. She 
rolled up the poster slowly, securing it with one of the 
elastic bands she al ways wore around her wrist for tyi ng 
back her thick, unruly hair, streaked here and therewith 
henna. "I'm going to put it in my study," she informed 
him, "That way you don't have to look at it," 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE 8D 152 


"What about the housewarming? They'll want to see 
all the rooms. I've invited people from the office." 

She rolled her eyes. Sanjeev noted that the symphony, 
now in its third movement, had reached a crescendo, for 
it pulsed with the tel I tale dashing of cymbals. 

"I'd put it behind the door," she offered, "That way, 
when they peek in, they won't see. Happy?" 

He stood watching her as she left the room, with her 
poster and her cigarette; a few ashes had fallen to the 
floor where she'd been standing. He bent down, pinched 
them between his fingers, and deposited them in his 
cupped palm. The tender fourth movement, the adagietto, 
began. During breakfast Sanjeev had read in the liner 
notes that Mahler had proposed to his wife by sending 
her the manuscript of this portion of the score. Although 
there were elements of tragedy and struggle in the Fifth 
Symphony, he had read, it was principally music of love 
and happiness. 

He heard the toilet flush. "By the way," Twinkle 
hollered, "if you want to impress people, I wouldn't play 
this music. It's putting me to sleep." 

Sanjeev went to the bathroom to throw away the 
ashes. The cigarette butt still bobbed in the toilet bowl, 
but the tank was refilling, so he had to wait a moment 
before he could flush it again. In the mirror of the 
medicine cabinet he inspected his long eyelashes — like 
a girl's, Twinkle liked to tease. Though he was of 
average build, his cheeks had a plumpness to them; this, 
along with the eyelashes, detracted, he feared, from 
what he hoped was a distinguished profile. He was of 
average height as well, and had wished ever since he 
had stopped growing that he were just one inch taller. 
For this reason it irritated him when Twinkle insisted on 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 153 


wearing high heels as she had donethe other night when 
they atedinner in Manhattan. This was the first weekend 
after they'd moved into the house, by then the mantel 
had already filled up considerably, and they bickered 
about it in the car on the way down. But then Twinkle 
had drunk four glasses of whiskey in a nameless bar in 
Alphabet City, and forgot all about it. She dragged him 
to a tiny bookshop on St. Mark's Place, where she 
browsed for nearly an hour and when they left she 
insisted that they dance a tango on the si dewalk in front 
of strangers. 

Afterward, she tottered on his arm, rising faintly over 
his line of vision, in a pair of suede three-inch leopard- 
print pumps. In this manner they walked the endless 
blocks back to a parking garage on Washington Square, 
for Sanjeev had heard far too many stories about the 
terrible things that happened to cars to Manhattan. "But 
I do nothing all day except sit at my desk." she fretted 
when they were driving home, after he had mentioned 
that her shoes looked uncomfortable and suggested that 
perhaps she should not wear them. "I can't exactly wear 
heels when I'm typing." Though he abandoned the 
argument, he knew for a fact chat she didn't spend all 
day at her desk: just that afternoon, when he got back 
from a run, he found her inexplicably in bed, reading. 
When he asked why shewas in bed in the middle of the 
day she told him she was bored. He had wanted to say 
to her then, You could unpack some boxes. You could 
sweep the attic. You could retouch the paint on the 
bathroom windowsill, and after you do it you could 
warn me so that I don't put my watch on it. They didn't 
bother her, these scattered, unsettled matters. She 
seemed content with whatever clothes she found at the 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE 8D 154 


front of the closet, with whatever magazine was lying 
around, with whatever song was on the radio — content 
yet curious. And now all of her curiosity centered 
around discovering the next treasure. 

A few days later when Sanjeev returned from the 
office, he found Twinkleon the telephone, smoking and 
talking to one of her girlfriends in California even 
though it was before five o'clock and the long-distance 
rates were at their peak. "Highly devout people," she 
was saying, pausing every now and then to exhale. 
"Each day is like a treasure hunt. I'm serious. This you 
won't believe. The switch plates in the bedrooms were 
decorated with scenes from the Bible. You know, Noah's 
Ark and all that. Three bedrooms, but one is my study. 
Sanjeev went to the hardware store right away and 
replaced them, can you imagine, he replaced every 
single one." 

Now it was thefriend's turn to talk. Twinkle nodded, 
slouched on the floor in front of the fridge, wearing 
black stirrup pants and a yellow chenille sweater, 
groping for her Lighter. Sanjeev could smell something 
aromatic on the stove, and he picked his way carefully 
across the extra-long phone cord tangled on the Mexican 
terra-cotta tiles. He opened the lid of a pot with some 
sort of reddish brown sauce dripping over the sides, 
boiling furiously. 

"It's a stew made with fish, I put the vinegar in it," 
she said to him, interrupting her friend, crossing her 
fingers, "Sorry, you were saying?" She was like that, 
excited and delighted by little things, crossing her 
fingers before any remotely unpredictable event, like 
tasting a new flavor of icecream or dropping a letter in a 
mailbox. It was a quality he did not understand. It made 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 155 


him feel stupid, as if the world contained hidden 
wonders he could not anticipate, or see. H e Iooked at her 
face, which, it occurred to him, had not grown out of its 
girlhood, the eyes untroubled, the pleasing features 
unfirm, as if they still had to settle into some sort of 
permanent expression. Nicknamed after a nursery 
rhyme, she had yet to shed a childhood endearment. 
Now, in the second month of their marriage, certain 
things nettled him —the way she sometimes spat a little 
when she spoke, or left her undergarments after 
removing them at night at the foot of their bed rather 
than depositing them in the laundry hamper. 

They had met only four months before. Her parents 
who lived in California, and his who still lived in 
Calcutta, were old friends, and across continents they 
had arranged the occasion at which Twinkleand Sanjeev 
were introduced —a sixteenth birthday party for a 
daughter in their circle— when Sanjeev was in Palo Alto 
on business. At the restaurant they were seated side by 
sideata round tablewith a revolving platter of spared bs 
and egg rolls and chicken wings, which, they concurred, 
all tasted the same. They had concurred too on their 
adolescent but still persistent fondness for Wodehouse 
novels, and their dislike for the sitar, and later Twinkle 
confessed that she was charmed by the way Sanjeev had 
dutifully refilled her teacup during their conversation. 

And so the phone calls began, and grew longer, and 
then the visits, first he to Stanford, then she to 
Connecticut, after which Sanjeev would save in an 
ashtray left on the balcony the crushed cigarettes she 
had smoked during the weekend — saved them, that is, 
until the next time she came to visit him, and then he 
vacuumed the apartment, washed the sheets, even 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 156 


dusted the plant leaves in her honor. She was twenty- 
seven and recently abandoned, he had gathered, by an 
American who had tried and failed to be an actor; 
Sanjeev was lonely, with an excessively generous income 
for a single man, and had never been in love. At the 
urging of their matchmakers, they married in India, 
amid hundreds of well-wishers whom he barely 
remembered from his childhood, in incessant August 
rains, under a red and orange tent strung with 
Christmas tree Iights on M andeville Road. 

"Did you sweep the attic?" he asked Twinkle later as she 
was folding paper napkins and wedging them by their 
plates. The attic was the only part of the house they had 
notyetgiven an initial cleaning. 

"Not yet. I will. I promise. I hope this tastes good." 
she said, planting the steaming pot on top of thejesus 
trivet. There was a loaf of Italian bread in a little basket, 
and iceberg lettuce and grated carrots tossed with 
bottled dressing and croutons, and glasses of red wine. 
She was not terribly ambitious in the kitchen. She 
bought preroasted chickens from the supermarkd: and 
served them with potato salad prepared who knew 
when, sold in little plastic containers. Indian food, she 
complained, was a bother; she detested chopping garlic, 
and peeling ginger, and could not operate a blender, and 
so it was Sanjeev who, on weekends, seasoned mustard 
oil with cinnamon sticks and cloves in order to produce 
a proper curry. 

He had to admit, though, that whatever it was that 
she had cooked today, it was unusually tasty, attractive 
even, with bright white cubes of fish, and flecks of 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES sa 157 


parsley, and fresh tomatoes gleaming in the dark brown- 
red broth. 

"How did you make it?" 

"I made it up." 

"What did you do?" 

"I just put some things into the pot and added the 
malt vinegar at the end." 

"How much vinegar?" 

She shrugged, ripping off some bread and plunging it 
into her bowl. 

"What do you mean you don't know? You should 
write it down. What if you need to make it again, for a 
party or something?" 

"I'll remember," she said. She covered the bread 
basket with a dishtowel that had, he suddenly noticed, 
theTen Commandments printed on it. Sheflashed him a 
smile, giving his knee a little squeeze under the table. 
"Face it. This house is blessed." 

The housewarming party was scheduled for the last 
Saturday in October, and they had invited about thirty 
people. All were Sanjeev's acquaintances, people from 
the office, and a number of Indian couples in the 
Connecticut area, many of whom he barely knew, but 
who had regularly invited him, in his bachelor days, to 
supper on Saturdays. He often wondered why they 
included him in their circle. He had little in common 
with any of them, but he always attended their 
gatherings, to eat spiced chickpeas and shrimp cutlets, 
and gossip and discuss politics, for he seldom had other 
plans. So far, no one had met Twinkle; back when they 
werestill dating, Sanjeev didn't want to waste their brief 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 158 


weekends together with people he associated with being 
alone. Other than Sanjea/ and an ex-boyfriend who she 
believed worked in a pottery studio in Brookfield, she 
knew no one in the state of Connecticut. She was 
completing her master's thesis at Stanford, a study of an 
Irish poet whom Sanjeev had never heard of. 

Sanjeev had found the house on his own before 
leaving for the wedding, for a good price, in a 
neighborhood with a fine school system. He was 
impressed by the elegant curved staircase with its 
wrought-iron banister, and the dark wooden 
wainscoting, and the solarium overlooking 
rhododendron bushes, and the sol id brass 22, which also 
happened to be the date of his birth, nailed impressively 
to the vaguely Tudor facade. There were two working 
fireplaces, a two-car garage, and an attic suitable for 
converting into extra bedrooms if, the Realtor 
mentioned, the need should arise. By then Sanjeev had 
already made up his mind, was determined that he and 
Twinkle should live there together, forever, and so he 
had not bothered to notice the switch plates covered 
with biblical stickers, or the transparent decal of the 
Virgin on the half shell, as Twinkle liked to call it, 
adhered to the window in the master bedroom. When, 
after moving in, he tried to scrape it off, he scratched the 
glass. 

The weekend before the party they were raking the lawn 
when he heard Twinkle shriek. He ran to her, clutching 
his rake, worried that she had discovered a dead animal, 
or a snake. A brisk October breeze stung the tops of his 
ears as his sneakers crunched over brown and yellow 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 159 


leaves. When he reached her, she had collapsed on the 
grass, dissolved in nearly silent laughter. Behind an 
overgrown forsythia bush was a plaster Virgin Mary as 
tall as their waists, with a blue painted hood draped 
over her head in the manner of an Indian bride. Twinkle 
grabbed the hem of her T-shirt and began wiping away 
the di rt stai ni ng the statue's brow. 

"I suppose you want to put her by the foot of our 
bed," Sanjeev said. 

She looked at him, astonished. Her belly was 
exposed, and he saw that there were goose bumps 
around her navel. "What do you think? Of course we 
can't put this in our bedroom." 

"We can't?" 

"No, silly Sanj. This is meant for outside. For the 
lawn." 

"Oh God, no. Twinkle, no." 

"Butwemust. Itwould be bad luck not to." 

"All the neighbors will see. They'll think we're 
insane." 

"Why, for having a statue of the Virgin Mary on our 
lawn? Every other person in this neighborhood has a 
statue of Mary on the lawn. We'll fit right in." 

"We're not Christian." 

"So you keep reminding me." She spat onto the rip of 
her finger and started to rub intently at a particularly 
stubborn stain on Mary's chin. "Do you think this is dirt, 
or some ki nd of fungus?" 

He was getting nowhere with her, with this woman 
whom he had known for only four months and whom 
he had married, this woman with whom he now shared 
his life. He thought with a flicker of regret of the 
snapshots his mother used to send him from Calcutta, of 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 160 


prospective brides who could sing and sew and season 
lentils without consulting a cookbook. Sanjeev had 
considered these women, had even ranked them in order 
of preference, but then he had met Twinkle. "Twinkle, I 
can't have the people I work with see this statue on my 
lawn." 

"They can't fire you for being a believer. It would be 
discrimination." 

"That's not the poi nt.! 

"Why does it matter to you so much what other 
peoplethink?" 

"Twinkle, please." He was tired. He let his weight 
rest against his rake as she began dragging the statue 
toward an oval bed of myrtle, beside the lamppost that 
flanked the brick pathway. "Look, Sanj. She's so lovely." 

He returned to his pile of leaves and began to deposit 
them by handfuls into a plastic garbage bag. Over his 
head the blue sky was cloudless. One tree on the lawn 
was still full of leaves, red and orange, like the tent in 
which he had married Twinkle. 

He did not know if he loved her. He said he did when 
she had first asked him, one afternoon in Palo Alto as 
they sat side by side in a darkened, nearly empty movie 
theater. Before the film, one of her favorites, something 
in German that he found extremely depressing, she had 
pressed the tip of her nose to his so that hecould feel the 
flutter of her mascara-coated eyelashes. That afternoon 
he had replied, yes, he loved her, and she was delighted, 
and fed him a piece of popcorn, letting her finger linger 
an instant between his lips, as if it were his reward for 
coming up with the right answer. 

Though she did not say it herself, he assumed then 
that she loved him too, but now he was no longer sure. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES SO 161 


In truth, he had decided, returning to an empty carpeted 
condominium each night, and using only the top fork in 
his cutlery drawer, and turning away politely at those 
weekend dinner parties when the other men eventually 
put their arms around the waists of their wives and 
girlfriends, leaning over every now and again to kiss 
their shoulders or necks. It was not sending away for 
classical music CDs by mail, working his way 
methodically through the major composers that the 
catalogue recommended, and always sending his 
payments in on time. In the months before meeting 
Twinkle, Sanjeev had begun to realize this. 'You have 
enough money in the bank to raise three families." his 
mother reminded him when they spoke at the start of 
each month on the phone. "You need a wife to look after 
and love," Now he had one, a pretty one, from a suitably 
high caste, who would soon have a master's degree. 
What was there not to love? 

That evening Sanjeev poured himself a gin and tonic, 
drank it and most of another during one segment of the 
news, and then approached Twinkle, who was taking a 
bubble bath, for she announced that her limbs ached 
from raking the lawn, something she had never done 
before. He didn't knock. She had applied a bright blue 
mask to her face, was smoking and sipping some 
bourbon with ice and leafing through a fat paperback 
book whose pages had buckled and turned gray from 
the water. He glanced at the cover; the only thing 
written on it was the word "Sonnets" in dark red letters. 
He took a breath, and then he informed her very calmly 
that after finishing his drink he was going to put on his 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 162 


shoes and go outside and remove the Virgin from the 
front lawn. 

"Where are you going to put it?" she asked him 
dreamily, her eyes dosed. One of her legs emerged, 
unfolding gracefully, from the layer of suds. She flexed 
and poi nted her toes. 

"For now I am going to put it in the garage. Then 
tomorrow morning on my way to work I am going to 
take it to the dump." 

"Don't you dare." She stood up, letting the book fall 
into the water, bubbles dripping down her thighs. "I 
hate you," she informed him, her eyes narrowing at the 
word "hate." She reached for her bathrobe, tied it tightly 
about her waist, and padded down the winding 
staircase, leaving sloppy wet footprints along the 
parquet floor. When she reached the foyer, Sanjeev said, 
"Are you planning on leaving the house that way?" He 
felt a throbbing in his temples, and his voice revealed an 
unfamiliar snarl when he spoke. 

"Who cares? Who cares what way I leave this house?" 

"Where areyou planning on going at this hour?" 

"You can't throw away that statue. I won't let you." 
Her mask, now dry, had assumed an ashen quality, and 
water from her hair dripped onto the caked contours of 
her face. 

"Yes I can. I will." 

"No," Twinkle said, her voice suddenly small, "This 
is our house. We own it together. The statue is a part of 
our properly." She had begun to shiver. A small pool of 
bathwater had collected around her ankles. He went to 
shut a window, fearing that she would catch cold. Then 
he noticed that some of the water dripping down her 
hard blue face was tears. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 163 


"Oh God, Twinkle, please, I didn't mean it." He had 
never seen her cry before, had never seen such sadness 
in her eyes. She didn'tturn away or try to stop the tears; 
instead she looked strangely at peace. For a moment she 
closed her lids, pale and unprotected compared to the 
blue that caked the rest of her race. Sanjeev felt ill, as if 
he had eaten either too much or too I ittle. 

She went to him, placing her damp toweled arms 
about his neck, sobbing into his chest, soaking his shirt. 
The mask flaked onto his shoulders. 

In the end they settled on a compromise: the statue 
would be placed in a recess at the side of the house, so 
that it wasn't obvious to passersby, but was still clearly 
vi si bl e to al I w ho came. 

The menu for the party was fairly simple: there would 
be a case of champagne, and samosas from an Indian 
restaurant in H artford, and big trays of rice with chicken 
and almonds and orange peels, which Sanjeev had spent 
the greater part of the morni ng and afternoon prepari ng. 
He had never entertained on such a large scale before 
and, worried that there would not be enough to drink, 
ran out at one poi nt to buy another case of champagne 
just in case. For this reason he burned one of the rice 
trays and had to start it over again. Twinkle swept the 
floors and volunteered to pick up the samosas; she had 
an appointment for a manicure and a pedicure in that 
direction, anyway. Sanjeev had planned to ask if she 
would consider clearing the menagerie off the mantel, if 
only for the party, but she left while he was in the 
shower. She was gone for a good three hours, and so it 
was Sanjeev who did the rest of the cleaning. By five- 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 164 


thirty the entire house sparkled, with scented candles 
that Twinkle had picked up in Hartford illuminating the 
items on the mantel, and slender stalks of burning 
incense planted into the soil of potted plants. Each time 
he passed the mantel he winced, dreading the raised 
eyebrows of his guests as they viewed the flickering 
ceramic saints, the salt and pepper shakers designed to 
resemble Mary and Joseph. Still, they would be 
impressed, he hoped, by the lovely bay windows, the 
shining parquet floors, the impressive winding staircase, 
the wooden wainscoting, as they sipped champagne and 
dipped samosas in chutney. 

Douglas, one of the new consultants at the firm, and 
his girlfriend Nora were the first to arrive. Both were tall 
and blond, wearing matching wire-rimmed glasses and 
long black overcoats. N ora wore a black hat full of sharp 
thin feathers that corresponded to the sharp thin angles 
of her face. Her left hand was joined with Douglas's. In 
her right hand was a bottle of cognac with a red ribbon 
wrapped around its neck, which she gavetoTwinkle. 

"Great lawn, Sanjeev;" Douglas remarked. "We've 
got to get that rake out ourselves, sweetie. And this must 
be..." 

"My wife. Tanima." 

"Call me Twinkle." 

"What an unusual name," Nora remarked. 

Twinkle shrugged, "Not really. There's an actress in 
Bombay named Dimple Kapadia. She even has a sister 
named Simple." 

Douglas and Nora raised their eyebrows 
simultaneously, nodding slowly, as if to let the absurdity 
of the names settle in. "Pleased to meet you. Twinkle," 

" H el p yourself to champagne. There's gal I ons." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES SO 165 


"I hope you don't mind my asking," Douglas said, 
"but I noticed the statue outside, and are you guys 
Christian? I thought you were Indian," 

"There are Christians in India," Sanjeev replied, "but 
we're not." 

"I love your outfit," Nora told Twinkle. 

"And I adore your hat. Would you like the grand 
tour?" 

The bell rang again, and again and again. Within 
minutes, it seemed, the house had filled with bodies and 
conversations and unfamiliar fragrances. The women 
wore heels and sheer stockings, and short black dresses 
made of crepe and chiffon. They handed their wraps and 
coats to Sanjeev, who draped them carefully on hangers 
in the spacious coat closet, though Twinkle told people 
to throw their things on the ottomans in the solarium. 
Some of the Indian women wore their finest saris, made 
with gold filigree that draped in elegant pleats over their 
shoulders. The men wore jackets and ties and citrus- 
scented aftershaves. As people filtered from one room to 
the next, presents piled onto the long cherry-wood table 
that ran from one end of the downstai rs hal I to the other. 

It bewildered Sanjeev that it was for him, and his 
house, and his wife, that they had all gone to so much 
care. The only other time in his life that something 
similar had happened was his wedding day, but 
somehow this was different, for these were not his 
family, but peoplewho knew him only casually, and in a 
sense owed him nothing. Everyone congratulated him. 
Lester, another coworker, predicted that Sanjeev would 
be promoted to vice president in two months maximum. 
People devoured thesamosas, and dutifully admired the 
freshly painted ceilings and walls, the hanging plants, 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE 8D 166 


the bay windows, the silk paintings from Jaipur. But 
most of all they admired Twinkle, and her brocaded 
salwar-kameez, which was the shade of a persimmon with 
a low scoop in the back and the little string of white rose 
petals she had coiled cleverly around her head, and the 
pearl choker with a sapphire at its center that adorned 
her throat. Over hectic jazz records, played under 
Twinkle's supervision, they laughed at her anecdotes 
and observations, forming a widening circle around her, 
while Sanjeev replenished the samosas that he kept 
warming evenly in the oven, and getting ice for people's 
drinks and opening more bottles of champagne with 
some difficulty, and explaining for the fortieth time that 
he wasn't Christian. It was Twinkle who led them in 
separate groups up and down the winding stairs, to gaze 
at the back lawn, to peer down the cellar steps. "Your 
friends adore the poster in my study," she mentioned to 
him triumphantly, placing her hand on the small of his 
back as they, at one point, brushed past each other. 

Sanjeev went to the kitchen, which was empty, and 
ate a piece of chicken out of the tray on the counter with 
hi s fi nger because he thought no one was I ooki ng. H e ate 
a second piece, then washed it down with a gulp of gin 
strai ght from the bottl e. 

"Great house. Great rice." Sunil, an anesthesiologist, 
walked in, spooning food from his paper plate into his 
mouth. "Do you have more champagne?" 

"Your wife's wow," added Prabal, following behind. 
He was an unmarried professor of physics at Yale. For a 
moment Sanjeev stared at him blankly, then blushed; 
once at a dinner party Prabal had pronounced that 
Sophia Loren was wow, as was Audrey Hepburn. "Does 
she have a sister?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES SO 167 


Sunil picked a raisin out of the rice tray. "Is her last 
name Little Star?" 

The two men laughed and started eating more rice 
from the tray, plowing through it with their plastic 
spoons. Sanjeev went down to the cellar for more liquor. 
For a few minutes he paused on the steps, in the damp, 
cool silence, hugging the second crate of champagne to 
his chest as the party drifted above the rafters. Then he 
set the rei nforcements on the d i ni ng tabl e. 

"Yes, everything, we found them all in the house, in 
the most unusual places," he heard Twinkle saying in 
the living room. "In fact we keep finding them." 

"No!" 

"Yes! Every day is like a treasure hunt. It's too good. 
God only knows what elsewe'll find, no pun intended." 

That was what started it. As if by some unspoken 
pact, the whole party joined forces and began combing 
through each of the rooms, opening closets on their own, 
peering under chairs and cushions, feeling behind 
curtains, removing books from bookcases. Groups 
scampered, giggling and swaying up and down the 
winding staircase. 

"We've never explored the attic," Twinkle announced 
suddenly, and so everybody followed. 

"How do we get up there?" 

"There's a ladder in the hallway, somewhere in the 
ceiling." 

Wearily Sanjeev followed at the back of the crowd, to 
point out the location of the ladder, but Twinkle had 
already found it on her own. "Eureka!" she hollered. 

Douglas pulled the chain that released the steps. His 
face was flushed and he was wearing N ora's feather hat 
on his head. One by one guests disappeared, men 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE K> 168 


helping women as they placed their strappy high heels 
on the narrow slats of the ladder, the Indian women 
wrap pi ng the free ends of thei r expen si ve sari s i nto thei r 
waistbands. The men followed behind, all quickly 
disappearing, until Sanjeev alone remained at the top of 
the winding staircase. Footsteps thundered over his 
head. Hehad no desire to join them. Hewondered if the 
ceiling would collapse, imagined, for a split second, the 
sight of all the tumbling drunk perfumed bodies 
crashing, tangled, around him. He heard a shriek, and 
then rising, spreading waves of laughter in discordant 
tones. Something fell, something else shattered. He 
could hear them bobbing around a trunk. They seemed 
to be struggling to get it open, banging feverishly on its 
surface. 

He thought perhaps Twinkle would call for his 
assistance, but he was not summoned. He looked about 
the hallway and to the landing below, at the champagne 
glasses and half-eaten samosas and napkins smeared 
with lipstick abandoned in every corner, on every 
available surface. Then he noticed that Twinkle, in her 
haste, had discarded her shoes altogether, for they lay by 
the foot of the ladder, black patent-leather mules with 
heels like golf tees, open toes, and slightly soiled silk 
labels on the instep where her soles had rested. He 
placed them in the doorway of the master bedroom so 
that no one would nip when they descended. 

He heard something creaking open slowly. The 
strident voices had subsided to an even murmur. It 
occurred to Sanjeev that he had the house all to himself. 
The music had ended and he could hear, if he 
concentrated, the hum of the refrigerator, and the rustle 
of the last leaves on the trees outside, and the tapping of 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 169 


their branches against the window panes. With one flick 
of his hand he could snap the ladder back on its spring 
into the ceiling, and they would have no way of getting 
down unless he were to pull the chain and let them. He 
thought of all the things he could do, undisturbed. He 
could sweep Twinkle's menagerie into a garbage bag 
and get in the car and drive it all to the dump, and tear 
down the poster of weeping Jesus, and take a hammer to 
the Virgin Mary while he was at it. Then he would 
return to the empty house; he could easily clear up the 
cups and plates in an hour'stime, and pour himself agin 
and tonic, and eat a plate of warmed rice and listen to 
his new Bach CD while reading the liner notes so as to 
understand it properly. He nudged the ladder slightly, 
but it was sturdily planted against the floor. Budging it 
would require some effort. 

"My God, I need a cigarette," Twinkle exclaimed 
from above. 

Sanjeev felt knots forming at the back of his neck. H e 
felt dizzy. He needed to lie down. He walked toward the 
bedroom, but stopped short when he saw Twinkle's 
shoes facing him in the doorway. He thought of her 
slipping them on her feet. But instead of feeling irritated, 
as he had ever since they'd moved into the house 
together, he felt a pang of anticipation at the thought of 
her rushing unsteadily down the winding staircase in 
them, scratching the floor a bit in her path. The pang 
intensified as he thought of her rushing to the bathroom 
to brighten her lipstick, and eventually rushing to get 
people their coats, and finally rushing to the cherry- 
wood table when the last guest had left, to begin 
opening their housewarming presents. It was the same 
pang he used to feel before they were married, when he 



THIS BLESSED HOUSE SO 170 


would hang up the phone after one of their 
conversations, or when he would drive back from the 
airport, wondering which ascending plane in the sky 
was hers. 

"Sanj, you won't believe this." 

She emerged with her back to him, her hands over 
her head, the tops of her bare shoulder blades 
perspiring, supporting something still hidden from 
view. 

"You got it, Twinkle?" someone asked. 

"Yes, you can let go." 

N ow he saw that her hands were wrapped around it: 
a solid silver bust of Christ, the head easily three times 
the size of his own. It had a patrician bump on its nose, 
magnificent curly hair that rested atop a pronounced 
collarbone, and a broad forehead that reflected in 
miniature the walls and doors and lampshades around 
them. Its expression was confident, as if assured of its 
devotees, the unyielding lips sensuous and full. It was 
also sporting Nora's feather hat. As Twinkle descended, 
Sanjeev put his hands around her waist to balance her, 
and he relieved her of the bust when she had reached the 
ground. It weighed a good thirty pounds. The others 
began lowering themselves slowly, exhausted from the 
hunt. Some trickled downstairs in search of a fresh 
drink. 

She took a breath, raised her eyebrows, crossed her 
fingers, "Would you mind terribly if we displayed it on 
the mantel? Just for tonight? I know you hate it." 

He did hate it. He hated its immensity, and its 
flawless, polished surface, and its undeniable value. He 
hated that it was in his house, and that he owned it. 
Unlike the other things they'd found, this contained 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 171 


dignity, solemnity, beauty even. But to his surprise these 
qualities made him hate it all the more. Most of all he 
hated it because he knew thatTwinkle loved it. 

"I'll keep it in my study from tomorrow," Twinkle 
added. "I promise." 

She would never put it in her study, he knew. For the 
rest of their days together she would keep it on the 
center of the mantel, flanked on either side by the rest of 
the menagerie. Each time they had guests Twinkle 
would explain how she had found it, and they would 
admire her as they listened. He gazed at the crushed 
rose petals in her hair, at the pearl and sapphire choker 
at her throat, at the sparkly crimson polish on her toes. 
He decided these were among the things that made 
Prabal think shewas wow. His head ached from gin and 
his arms ached from the weight of the statue. He said. "I 
put your shoes i n the bedroom." 

"Thanks. But my feet are killing me." Twinkle gave 
his elbow a little squeeze and headed for the living 
room. 

Sanjeev pressed the massive silver face to his ribs, 
careful not to let the feather hat slip, and followed her. 



TheTreatment 
ofBibi Haidar 


F or the greater number of her twenty-nine 
years, Bibi Haidar suffered from an ailment that 
baffled family, friends, priests, palmists, spinsters, 
gem therapists, prophets, and fools, in efforts to cure 
her, concerned members of our town brought her holy 
water from seven holy rivers. When we heard her 
screams and throes in the night, when her wrists were 
bound with ropes and stinging poultices pressed upon 
her, we named her in our prayers. Wise men had 
massaged eucalyptus balm into her temples, steamed 
her face with herbal infusions. At the suggestion of a 
blind Christian she was once taken by train to kiss the 
tombs of saints and martyrs. Amulets warding against 
the evil eye girded her arms and neck. Auspicious stones 
adorned her fingers. 

Treatments offered by doctors only made matters 
worse. Allopaths, homeopaths, ayurvedics— over time, 
all branches of the medical arts had been consulted. 
Their advice was endless. After x-rays, probes, 


INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 173 


auscultations, and injections, some merely advised Bibi 
to gain weight, others to lose it. If one forbade her to 
sleep beyond dawn, another insisted she remain in bed 
till noon. This one told her to perform headstands, that 
one to chant Vedic verses at specified intervals 
throughout the day. "Take her to Calcutta for hypnosis" 
was a suggestion still others would offer. Shuttled from 
one specialist to the next, the girl had been prescribed to 
shun garlic, consume disproportionate quantities of 
bitters, meditate, drink green coconut water, and 
swallow raw duck's eggs beaten in milk. In short, Bibi's 
life was an encounter with one fruitless antidote after 
another. 

The nature of her illness, which struck without 
warning, confined her world to the unpainted four-story 
building in which her only local family, an elder cousin 
and his wife, rented an apartment on the second floor. 
Liable to fall unconscious and enter, at any moment, into 
a shameless delirium, Bibi could be trusted neither to 
cross a street nor board a tram without supervision. H er 
daily occupation consisted of sitting in the storage room 
on the roof of our building, a space in which one could 
sit but not comfortably stand, featuring an adjoining 
latrine, a curtained entrance, one window without a 
grille, and shelves made from the panels of old doors. 
There, cross-legged on a square of jute, she recorded 
inventory for the cosmetics shop that her cousin H aldar 
owned and managed at the mouth of our courtyard. For 
her services, Bibi received no income but was given 
meals, provisions, and sufficient meters of cotton at 
every October holiday to replenish her wardrobe at an 
inexpensive tailor. At night she slept on a folding camp 
cotin the cousin's place downstairs. 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 174 


In the mornings Bibi arrived in the storage room 
wearing cracked plastic slippers and a housecoat whose 
hem stopped some inches below the knee, a length we 
had not worn since we were fifteen. Her shins were 
hairless, and sprayed with a generous number of pallid 
freckles. She bemoaned her fate and challenged her stars 
as we hung our laundry or scrubbed scales from our 
fish. She was not pretty. Her upper lip was thin, her 
teeth too small. H er gums protruded when she spoke. "I 
ask you, is it fair for a girl to sit out her years, pass 
neglected through her prime, listing labels and prices 
without promise of a future?" H er voice was louder than 
necessary, as if she was speaking to a deaf person. "Is it 
wrong to envy you, all brides and mothers, busy with 
lives and cares? Wrong to want to shade my eyes, scent 
my hair? To raise a child and tech him sweet from sour, 
good from bad?" 

Each day she unloaded her countless privations upon 
us, until it became unendurably apparent that Bibi 
wanted a man. She wanted to be spoken for, protected, 
placed on her path in life. Liketherestof us, shewanted 
to serve suppers, and scold servants, and set aside 
money in her almari to have her eyebrows threaded 
every three weeks at the Chinese beauty parlor. She 
pestered us for details of our own weddings: thejewels, 
the invitations, the scent of tuberoses strung over the 
nuptial bed. When, at her insistence, we showed her our 
photo albums embossed with the designs of butterflies, 
she pored over the snapshots that chronicled the 
ceremony: butter poured in fires, garlands exchanged, 
vermillion-painted fish, trays of shells and silver coins. 
"An impressive number of guests," she would observe, 
stroking with her finger the misplaced faces that had 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES sa 175 


surrounded us. "When it happens to me, you will all be 
present." 

Anticipation begin to plague her with such ferocity 
that the thought of a husband, on which all her hopes 
were pinned, threatened at times to send her into 
another attack. Amid tins of talc and boxes of bobby pins 
she would curl up on the floor of the storage room, 
speaking in non sequiturs "I will never dip my feet in 
milk," she whimpered. "My face will never be painted 
with sandalwood paste. Who will rub me with turmeric? 
My name will never be printed with scarlet ink on a 
card." 

Her soliloquies mawkish, her sentiments maudlin, 
malaise dripped I ike a fever from her pores. In her most 
embittered moments we wrapped her in shawls, washed 
her face from the cistern tap, and brought her glasses of 
yogurt and rosewater. In moments when she was less 
disconsolate, we encouraged her to accompany us to the 
tailor and replenish her blouses and petticoats, in part to 
provide her with a change of scenery, and in part 
because we thought it might increase whatever 
matrimonial prospects she had. "No man wants a 
woman who dresses like a dishwasher," we told her. 
"Do you want all that fabric of yours to go to the 
moths?" She sulked, pouted, protested, and sighed. 
"Wheredo I go, who would I dress for?" shedemanded. 
"Who takes me to the cinema, the zoo-garden, buys me 
lime soda and cashews? Admit it, are these concerns of 
mine? I will never be cured, never married." 

But then a new treatment was prescribed for Bibi, the 
most outrageous of them all. One evening on herway to 
dinner, she collapsed on the third-floor landing, 
pounding her fists, kicking her feet, sweating buckets, 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 176 


lost to this world. Her moans echoed through the 
stairwell, and we rushed out of our apartments to calm 
her at once, bearing palm fans and sugar cubes, and 
tumblers of refrigerated water to pour on her head. Our 
children clung to the banisters and witnessed her 
paroxysm; our servants were sent to summon her 
cousin. It was ten minutes before Haidar emerged from 
his shop, impassive apart from the red in his face. He 
told us to stop fussing, and then with no efforts to 
repress his disdain he packed her into a rickshaw bound 
for the polyclinic. It was there, after performing a series 
of blood tests, that the doctor in charge of Bibi's case, 
exasperated, concluded that a marriage would cure her. 

News spread between our window bars, across our 
clotheslines, and over the pigeon droppings that 
plastered the parapets of our rooftops. By the next 
morning, three separate palmists had examined Bibi's 
hand and confirmed that there was, no doubt, evidence 
of an imminent union etched into her skin. Unsavory 
sorts murmured indelicacies at cutlet stands; 
grandmothers consulted almanacs to determine a 
propitious hour for the betrothal. For days afterward, as 
we walked our children to school, picked up our 
cleaning, stood in lines at the ration shop, we whispered. 
Apparently some activity was what the poor girl needed 
all along. For the first time we imagined the contours 
below her housecoat, and attempted to appraise the 
pleasures she could offer a man. For the first time we 
noted the clarity of her complexion, the length and 
languor of her eyelashes, the undeniably elegant 
armature of her hands. "They say it's the only hope. A 
case of overexcitement. They say" — and here we 
paused, blushing — "relations will calm her blood." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES sa 177 


Need I ess to say, Bibi was delighted by the diagnosis, 
and began at once to prepare for conjugal life. With 
some damaged merchandise from Haidar's shop she 
polished her toenails and softened her elbows. 
Neglecting the new shipments delivered to the storage 
room, she began hounding us for recipes, for vermicelli 
pudding and papaya stew, and inscribed them in 
crooked letters in the pages of her inventory ledger. She 
made guest lists, dessert lists, listed lands in which she 
intended to honeymoon. She applied glycerine to 
smooth her lips, resisted sweets to reduce her 
measurements. One day she asked one of us to 
accompany her to the tailor, who stitched her a new 
salwar-kameez in an umbrella cut, the fashion that season. 
On the streets she dragged us to the counters of each and 
every jeweler, peering into glass cases, seeking our 
opinions of tiara designs and locket settings. In the 
windows of sari shops she pointed to a magenta 
Benarasi silk, and a turquoise one, and then onethatwas 
the color of marigolds. "The first part of the ceremony I 
will wear this one, then this one, then this." 

But Haidar and his wife thought otherwise. Immune 
to her fancies, indifferent to our fears, they conducted 
business as usual, stuffed together in that cosmetics shop 
no bigger than a wardrobe, whose walls were crammed 
on three sides with hennas, hair oils, pumice scones, and 
fairness creams. "We have little time for indecent 
suggestions," replied Haidar to those who broached the 
subject of Bibi's health. "What won't be cured must be 
endured. Bibi has caused enough worry, added enough 
to expenses, sullied enough the family name." His wife, 
seated beside him behind the tiny glass counter, fanned 
the mottled skin above her breasts and agreed. She was a 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 178 


heavy woman whose powder, a shade too pale for her, 
caked in the creases of her throat. "Besides, who would 
marry her? The girl knows nothing about anything, 
speaks backward, is practically thirty, can't light a coal 
stove, can't boil rice, can't tell the difference between 
fennel and a cumin seed. Imagine her attempting to feed 
a man!" 

They had a point. Bibi had never been taught to be a 
woman; the illness had left her naive in most practical 
matters. Haidar's wife, convinced that the devil himself 
possessed her, kept Bibi away from fire and flame. She 
had not been taught to wear a sari without pinning it in 
four different places, nor could she embroider slipcovers 
or crochet shawls with any exceptional talent. She was 
not allowed to watch the television (Haidar assumed its 
electronic properties would excite her), and was thus 
ignorant of the events and entertainments of our world. 
Her formal studies had ended after theninth standard. 

For Bibi's sake we argued in favor of finding a 
husband. "It's what she s wanted all along," we pointed 
out But Haidar and his wife were impossible to reason 
with. Their rancor toward Bibi was fixed on their lips, 
thinner than the strings with which they tied our 
purchases. When we maintained that the new treatment 
deserved a chance, they contended, "Bibi possesses 
insufficient quantities of respect and self-control. She 
plays up her malady for the attention. The best thing is 
to keep her occupied, away from the trouble she 
invariably creates." 

"Why not marry her off, then? It will get her off your 
hands, at least." 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 179 


"And waste our profits on a wedding? Feeding 
guests, ordering bracelets, buying a bed, assembling a 
dowry?" 

But Bibi's gripes persisted. Late one morning, dressed 
under our supervision in a sari of lavender eyelet chiffon 
and mirrored slippers lent to her for the occasion, she 
hastened in uneven steps to Haidar's shop and insisted 
on being taken to the photographer's studio so that her 
portrait, like those of other brides-in-waiting, could be 
circulated in the homes of eligible men. Through the 
shutters of our balconies we watched her; perspiration 
had already left black moons beneath her armpits. 
"Apart from my x-rays I have never been 
photographed," she fretted "Potential in-laws need to 
know what I look like." But Haidar refused. He said that 
anyone who wished to see her could observe her for 
themselves, weeping and wailing and warding off 
customers. She was a bane for business, he told her, a 
liability and a loss. Who in this town needed a photo to 
know that? 

The next day Bibi stopped listing inventory altogether 
and regaled us, instead, with imprudent details about 
Haidar and his wife. "On Sundays he plucks hairs from 
her chin. They keep their money refrigerated under lock 
and key." For the benefit of neighboring rooftops she 
strutted and shrieked; with each proclamation her 
audience expanded. "In the bath she applies chickpea 
flour to her arms because she thinks it will make her 
paler. The third toe on her right foot is missing. The 
reason they take such long siestas is that she is 
impossible to please." 

To get her to quiet down, Haidar placed a one-line 
advertisement in the town newspaper, in order to solicit 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 180 


a groom: "Girl, unstable, height 152 
centimetres, seeks husband." The identity of 
the prospective bride was no secret to the parents of our 
young men, and no family was willing to shoulder so 
blatant a risk. Who could blame them? It was rumored 
by many that Bibi conversed with herself in a fluent but 
totally incomprehensible language, and slept without 
dreams. Even the lonely four-toothed widower who 
repaired our handbags in the market could not be 
persuaded to propose. Nevertheless, to distract her, we 
began to coach her in wifely ways. "Frowning like a rice 
pot will get you nowhere. Men require that you caress 
them with your expression." As practice for the event of 
encountering a possible suitor, we urged her to engage 
in small conversations with nearby men. When the water 
bearer arrived, at the end of his rounds, to fill Bibi's urn 
in the storage room, we instructed her to say "How do 
you do?" When the coal supplier unloaded his baskets 
on the roof, we advised her to smile and make a 
comment about the weather. Recalling our own 
experiences, we prepared her for an interview. "Most 
likely the groom will arrive with one parent, a 
grandparent, and either an uncle or aunt. They will 
stare, ask several questions. They will examine the 
bottoms of your feet, the thickness of your braid. They 
will ask you to name the prime minister, recite poetry, 
feed a dozen hungry people on half a dozen eggs." 

When two months had passed without a single reply 
to the advertisement, Haidar and his wife felt 
vindicated. "Now do you see that she is unfit to marry? 
Now do you see no man of sane mind would touch 
her?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 181 


Things had not been so bad for Bibi before her father 
died. (The mother had not survived beyond the birth of 
the girl.) In his final years, the old man, a teacher of 
mathematics in our elementary schools, had kept 
assiduous track of Bibi's illness in hopes of determining 
some logic to her condition. "To every problem there is a 
solution," he would reply whenever we inquired after 
his progress. He reassured Bibi. For a time he reassured 
us all. He wrote letters to doctors in England, spent his 
evenings reading casebooks at the library, gave up 
eating meat on Fridays in order to appease his 
household god. Eventually he gave up teaching as well, 
tutoring only from his room, so that he could monitor 
Bibi at all hours. But though in hisyouth he had received 
prizes for his ability to deduce square roots from 
memory, he was unable to solve the mystery of his 
daughter's disease. For all his work, his records led him 
to conclude only that Bibi's attacks occurred more 
frequently in summer than winter, and that she had 
suffered approximately twenty-five major attacks in all. 
He created a chart of her symptoms with directions for 
calming her, and distributed it throughout the 
neighborhood, but these were eventually lost, or turned 
into sailboats by our children, or used to calculate 
grocery budgets on the reverse side. 

Apart from keeping her company, apart from 
soothing her woes, apart from keeping an occasional eye 
on her, there was little we could do to improve the 
situation. None of us were capable of understanding 
such desolation. Some days, after siesta, we combed out 
her hair, remembering now and then to change the part 
in her scalp so that it would not grow too broad. At her 
request we powdered the down over her lips and throat, 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 182 


pend I ed defi niti on i nto her brows, and wal ked her to the 
banks of the fish pond where our children played cricket 
in the afternoon. She was still determined to I urea man. 

"Apart from my condition I am perfectly healthy," 
she maintained, seating herself on a bench along the 
footpath where courting men and women strolled hand 
in hand. "I have never had a cold or flu. I have never 
had jaundice. I have never suffered from colic or 
indigestion." Sometimes we bought her smoked corn on 
the cob sprinkled with lemon juice, or two paisa 
caramels. We consoled her; when she was convinced a 
man was giving her the eye we humored her and agreed. 
But she was not our responsibility, and in our private 
moments we were thankful for it. 

In November we learned that Haidar's wife was 
pregnant. That morning in the storage room, Bibi wept. 
"She says I'm contagious, I ike the pox. She says I'll spoil 
the baby." She was breathing heavily, her pupils fixed to 
a peeling spot on the wall. "What will become of me?" 
There was still no response for the advertisement in the 
newspaper. "Is it not punishment enough that I bear this 
curse alone? Must I also be blamed for infecting 
another?" Dissent within the Haidar household grew. 
Thewife, convinced thatBibi'spresencewould infect the 
unborn child, began to wrap woolen shawls around her 
tumid belly. In the bathroom Bibi was given separate 
soaps and towels. According to the scullery maid, Bibi's 
plates were not washed with the others. 

And then one afternoon, without word of warning, it 
happened again. On the banks of the fish pond Bibi fell 
to the footpath. She shook. She shuddered. She chewed 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 183 


her lips. A group encircled the convulsing girl at once, 
eager to assist in whatever way possible. The opener of 
soda bottles pinned down her thrashing limbs. The 
vendor of sliced cucumbers attempted to unclasp her 
fingers. One of us doused her with water from the pond. 
Another wiped her mouth with a perfumed 
handkerchief. The seller of jackfruits was holding Bibi's 
head, which struggled to toss from side to side. And the 
man who cranked the sugarcane press gripped the palm 
fan that he ordinarily used to chase away flies, agitating 
the air from every conceivable angle. 

" I s there a doctor i n the crowd?" 

"Watch that she doesn't swallow her tongue." 

"Has anyone informed Haidar?" 

"She's hotter than coals!" 

In spite of our efforts, the tumult persisted. Wrestling 
with her adversary, wracked with anguish, she ground 
her teeth and twitched at the knees. Over two minutes 
had passed. We watched and worried. We wondered 
what to do. 

"Leather!" someone cried suddenly. "She needs to 
smel I leather." Then we remembered; the last ti me it had 
happened, a cowhide sandal held under her nostrils was 
what had finally freed Bibi from the clutches of her 
torment. 

"Bibi, what happened? Tell us what happened," we 
asked when she opened her eyes. 

"I felt hot, then hotter. Smoke passed before my eyes. 
The world went black. Didn't you see it?" 

A group of our husbands escorted her home. Dusk 
thickened, conch shells were blown, and the air grew 
dense with the incense of prayers. Bibi muttered and 
staggered but said nothing. Her cheeks were bruised 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR K> 184 


and nicked here and there. Her hair was matted, her 
elbows caked with dirt, and a small piece of one front 
tooth was missing. We followed behind, at what we 
assumed to be safe distances, holding our children by 
the hand. 

She needed a blanket, a compress, a sedative tablet. 
She needed supervision. But when we reached the 
courtyard Haidar and his wife would not have her in the 
flat. 

"The medical risk is too great for an expectant mother 
to be in contact with an hysterical person," he insisted. 

That ni ght Bi bi siept i n the storage room. 

Their baby, a girl, was delivered by forceps at the end of 
June. By then Bibi was sleeping downstairs again, 
though they kept her camp cot in the corridor, and 
would not let her touch the child directly. Every day 
they sent her to the roof to record inventory until lunch, 
at which point Haidar brought her receipts from the 
morning's sales and a bowl of yellow split peas for her 
lunch. At night she ate milk and bread alone in the 
stairwell. Another seizure, and another, went 
unchecked. 

When we voiced our concern, Haidar said it was not 
our business, and flatly refused to discuss the matter. To 
express our indignation we began to take our shopping 
elsewhere: this provided us with our only revenge. Over 
the weeks the products on H aldar's shelves grew dusty. 
Labelsfaded and colognes turned rank. Passing by in the 
evenings, we saw Haidar sitting alone, swatting moths 
with the sole of his slipper. We hardly saw the wife at 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 185 


all. According to the scullery maid she was still 
bedridden; apparently her labor had been complicated. 

Autumn came, with its promise of the October 
holidays, and the town grew busy shopping and 
planning for the season. Film songs blared from 
amplifiers strung through trees. Arcades and markets 
stayed open all hours. We bought our children balloons 
and colored ribbons, purchased sweetmeats by the kilo, 
paid calls in taxis to relatives we had not seen 
throughout the year. The days grew shorter, the 
evenings colder. We buttoned our sweaters and pulled 
up our socks. Then a chill set in that made our throats 
itch. We made our children gargle with warm saltwater 
and wrap mufflers around their necks. But it was the 
Haidar baby who ended up getting sick. 

A doctor was summoned in the middle of the night 
and commanded to reduce the fever. "Cure her," the 
wife pleaded. Her shrill commotion had woken us all. 
"We can give you anything, just cure my baby girl." The 
doctor prescribed a glucose formula, crushed aspirins in 
a mortar, and told them to wrap the child with quilts 
and covers. 

Fivedays later thefever had not budged. 

"It's Bibi," the wife wailed. "She's done it, she's 
infected our child. We should never have let her back 
down here. We should never have let her back into this 
house." 

And so Bibi started to spend her nights in the storage 
room again. At the wife's insistence Haidar even moved 
her camp cot up there, along with a tin trunk that 
contained her belongings. Her meals were left covered 
with a colander at the top of the stairs. 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 186 


"I don't mind," Bibi told us. "It's better to live apart 
from them, to set up house on my own." She unpacked 
the trunk — some housecoats, a framed portrait of her 
father, sewing supplies, and an assortment of fabrics — 
and arranged her things on a few empty shelves. By the 
week's end the baby had recuperated, but Bibi was not 
asked to return downstairs. "Don't worry, it's not as if 
they've locked me in here," she said in order to set us at 
ease. "The world begins at the bottom of the stairs. Now 
I am free to discover life as I please." 

But in truth she stopped going out altogether. When 
we asked her to come with us to the fish pond or to go 
see temple decorations she refused, claiming that she 
was stitching a new curtain to hang across the entrance 
of the storage room. H er skin looked ashen. She needed 
fresh air. "What about finding your husband?" we 
suggested. "How do you expect to charm a man sitting 
up here all day?" 

Nothing persuaded her. 


* * * 


By mid December, Haidar cleared all the unsold 
merchandise off the shelves of his beauty shop, and 
hauled them in boxes up to the storage room. We have 
succeeded in driving him more or less out of business. 
Before the years end the family moved away leaving an 
envelope containing three hundred rupees under Bibi's 
door. There was no more news of them. 

One of us had an address for a relation of Bibi's in 
Hyderabad, and wrote explaining the situation. The 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 187 


letter was returned unopened, address unknown. Before 
the coldest weeks set in, we had the shutters of the 
storage room repaired and attached a sheet of tin to the 
doorframe, so that she would at least havesome privacy. 
Someone donated a kerosene lam; another gave her 
some old mosquito netting and a pair of socks without 
heels. At every opportunity we reminded her that we 
surrounded her, that she could come to us if she ever 
needed advice or aid of any kind. For a time we sent our 
children to play on the roof in the afternoons, so that 
they could alert us if she was having another attack. But 
each night we left her alone. 

Some months passed. Bibi had retreated into a deep 
and prolonged silence. We took turns leaving her plates 
of rice and glasses of tea. She drank little, ate less, and 
began to assume an expression that no longer matched 
her years. At twilight she circled the parapet once or 
twice., but she never left the rooftop. After dark she 
remained behind the tin door and did not come out for 
any reason. We did not disturb her. Some of us began to 
wonder if she was dying. Others concluded that she had 
lost her mind. 

One morning in April, when the heat had returned 
for drying lentil wafers on the roof, we noticed that 
someone had vomited by the cistern tap. When we 
noticed this the second morning as well, we knocked on 
Bibi'stin door. When there was no answer we opened it 
ourselves, as there was no I ock to fasten it. 

We found her lying on the camp cot. She was about 
four months pregnant. 

She said she could not remember what had 
happened. She would not tell us who had done it. We 
prepared her semolina with hot milk raisins; still she 



THE TREATMENT OF BIBI HALDAR SO 188 


would not reveal the man's identity. In vain we searched 
for traces of the assault, some sign of the intrusion, but 
the room was swept and in order. On the floor beside 
the cot, her inventory ledger, open to a fresh page, 
contai ned a I i st of names. 

She carried the baby to full term, and one evening in 
September, we helped her deliver a son. We showed her 
how to feed him, and lull him to sleep. We bought her an 
oilcloth and helped her stitch clothes and pillowcases 
out of the fabric she had saved over the years. Within a 
month Bibi had recuperated from the birth, and with the 
money that Haidar had left her, she had the storage 
room white-washed, and placed padlocks on the 
window and doors. Then she dusted the shelves and 
arranged the leftover potions and lotions, selling 
Haidar's old inventory at half price. She told us to 
spread word of the sale, and we did. From Bibi we 
purchased our soaps and kohl, our combs and powders, 
and when she had sold the last of her merchandise, she 
went by taxi to the wholesale market, using her profits to 
restock the shelves. In this manner she raised the boy 
and ran a business in the storage room, and we did what 
we could to help. For years afterward, we wondered 
who in our town had disgraced her. A few of our 
servants were questioned, and in tea stalls and bus 
stands, possible suspects were debated and dismissed. 
But there was no point carrying out the investigation. 
She was, to the best of our knowledge, cured. 



The Third and 
Final Continent 


I left India in 1964 with a certificate in 
commerce and the equivalent, in those days, of ten 
dollars to my name. For three weeks I sailed on the 
SS Roma, an Italian cargo vessel, in a third-class cabin 
next to the shi p's engi ne, across the A rabi an Sea, the Red 
Sea, the Mediterranean, and finally to England. I lived in 
north London, in Finsbury Park, in a house occupied 
entirely by penniless Bengali bachelors like myself, at 
least a dozen and sometimes more, all struggling to 
educate and establish ourselves abroad. 

I attended lectures at LSE and worked at the 
university library to get by. WE lived three or four to a 
room, shared a single, icy toilet, and took turns cooking 
pots of egg curry, which we ate with our hands on a 
table covered with newspapers. Apart from our jobs we 
had few responsibilities. On weekends we lounged 
barefoot in drawstring pajamas, drinking tea and 
smoking Rothmans, or set out to watch cricket at Lord's. 
Some weekends the house was crammed with still more 


THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT K> 190 


Bengalis, to whom we had introduced ourselves at the 
greengrocer, or on the Tube, and we made yet more egg 
curry, and played Mukhesh on a Grundig reel-to-reel, 
and soaked our dirty dishes in the bathtub. Every now 
and then someone in the house moved out, to live with a 
woman whom his family back in Calcutta had 
determined he was to wed. In 1969, when I was thirty- 
six years old, my own marriage was arranged. Around 
the same time I was offered afull-timejob in America, in 
the processing department of a library at MIT, The salary 
was generous enough to support a wife, and I was 
honored to be hired by a world-famous university, and 
so I obtained a sixth-preference green card, and 
prepared to travel farther sti 11. 

By now I had enough money to go by plane. I flew 
first to Calcutta, to attend my wedding, and a week later 
I flew to Boston, to begin my new job. During theflight I 
read The Student Guide to North America, a paperback 
volume that I'd bought beforeleaving London, for seven 
shillings six pence on Tottenham Court Road, for 
although I was no longer a student I was on a budget all 
the same. I learned that Americans drove on the right 
side of the road, not the left, and that they called a lift an 
elevator and an engaged phone busy. "The pace of lifein 
North America is different from Britain as you will soon 
discover," the guidebook informed me. "Everybody feels 
he must get to the top. Don't expect an English cup of 
tea." As the plane began its descent over Boston H arbor, 
the pilot announced the weather and time, and that 
President Nixon had declared a national holiday: two 
American men had landed on the moon. Several 
passengers cheered. "God bless America!" one of them 
hollered. A cross the aisle, I saw a woman praying. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 191 


I spent my first night at the YM CA in Central Square, 
Cambridge, an inexpensive accommodation 
recommended by my guidebook. It was walking 
distance from M IT, and steps from the post office and a 
supermarket called Purity Supreme. The room contained 
a cot, a desk, and a small wooden cross on one wall. A 
sign on the door said cooking was strictly forbidden. A 
bare window overlooked Massachusetts Avenue, a 
major thoroughfare with traffic in both directions. Car 
horns, shrill and prolonged, blared one after another. 
Flashing sirens heralded endless emergencies, and afleet 
of buses rumbled past, their doors opening and closing 
with a powerful hiss, throughout the night. The noise 
was constantly distracting, at times suffocating. I felt it 
deep in my ribs, just as I had felt the furious drone of the 
engi ne on the SS R oma. But there was no shi p's deck to 
escape to, no glittering ocean to thrill my soul, no breeze 
to cool my face, no one to talk to. I was too tired to pace 
the gloomy corridors of the YMCA in my drawstring 
pajamas. Instead I sat at the desk and stared out the 
window, atthecity hall of Cambridge and a raw of small 
shops. In the morning I reported to my job at the Dewey 
Library, a beige fortlike building by Memorial Drive. I 
also opened a bank account, rented a post office box, and 
bought a plastic bowl and a spoon in Woolworth's, a 
store whose name I recognized from London. I went to 
Purity Supreme, wandering up and down the aisles, 
converting ounces to grams and comparing prices to 
things in England. In the end I bought a small carton of 
milk and a box of cornflakes. This was my first meal in 
America. I ate it at my desk. I preferred it to hamburgers 
or hot dogs, the only alternative I could afford in the 
coffee shops on Massachusetts Avenue, and, besides, at 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT K> 192 


the time I had yet to consume any beef. Even the simple 
chore of buying milk was new to me; in London we'd 
had bottles delivered each morning to our door, 

In a week I had adjusted, more or less. I ate cornflakes 
and milk, morning and night, and bought some bananas 
for variety, slicing them into the bowl with the edge of 
my spoon. In addition I bought tea bags and a flask, 
which the salesman in Woolworth's referred to as a 
thermos (a flask, he informed me, was used to store 
whiskey, another thing I had never consumed). For the 
price of one cup of tea at a coffee shop, I filled the flask 
with boiling water on my way to work each morning, 
and brewed the four cups I drank in the course of a day. 

I bought a larger carton of milk, and learned to leave it 
on the shaded part of the windowsill, as I had seen 
another resident at theY MCA do.To pass the time in the 
evenings I read the Boston Globe downstairs, in a 
spacious room with stained-glass windows. I read every 
article and advertisement, so that I would grow familiar 
with things, and when my eyes grew tired I slept. Only I 
did not sleep well. Each night I had to keep the window 
wide open, it was the only source of air in the stifling 
room, and the noise was intolerable. I would lie on the 
cot with my fingers pressed into my ears, but when I 
drifted off to sleep my hands fell away, and the noise of 
the traffic would wake me up again. Pigeon feathers 
drifted onto the windowsill, and one evening, when I 
poured milk over my cornflakes, I saw that it had 
soured. Nevertheless I resolved to stay attheYMCA for 
six weeks, until my wife's passport and green card were 
ready. Once she arrived I would have to rent a proper 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 193 


apartment, and from time to time I studied the classified 
section of the newspaper, or stopped in at the housing 
office at MIT during my lunch break, to see what was 
available in my price range. It was in this manner that I 
discovered a room for immediate occupancy, in a house 
on a quiet street, the listing said, for eight dollars per 
week. I copied the number into my guidebook and 
dialed from a pay telephone, sorting through the coins 
with which I was still unfamiliar, smaller and lighter 
than shillings, heavier and brighter than paisas. 

"Who is speaking?" a woman demanded. Her voice 
was bold and clamorous. 

"Yes, good afternoon, madame. I am calling about the 
room for rent." 

"Harvard or Tech?" 

"I beg your pardon?" 

"A re you from Harvard or Tech?" 

Gathering that Tech referred to the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, I replied, "I work at Dewey 
Library," adding tentatively, "atTech." 

"I only rent rooms to boys from Harvard or Tech!" 

"Yes, madame." 

I was given an address and an appointment for seven 
o'd ock that eveni ng. Thi rty mi nutes before the hour I set 
out, my guidebook in my pocket, my breadh fresh with 
Listenne. I turned down a street shaded with trees, 
perpendicular to Massachusetts Avenue. Stray blades of 
grass poked between the cracks of the footpath. In spite 
of the heat I wore a coat and a tie, regardi ng the event as 
I would any other interview; I had never lived in the 
home of a person who was not Indian. The house, 
surrounded by a chain-link fence, was off-white with 
dark brown trim. Unlike the stucco raw house I'd lived 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT SO 194 


in in London, this house, fully detached, was covered 
with wooden shingles, with a tangle of forsythia bushes 
plastered against the front and sides. When I pressed the 
calling bell, the woman with whom I had spoken on the 
phone hollered from what seemed to be just the other 
side of the door, "One minute, please!" 

Several minutes later the door was opened by a tiny, 
extremely old woman. A mass of snowy hair was 
arranged like a small sack on top of her head. As I 
stepped into the house she sat down on a wooden bench 
positioned at the bottom of a narrow carpeted staircase. 
Once she was settled on the bench, in a small pool of 
light, she peered up at me with undivided attention. She 
wore a I ong bl ack ski rt that spread I i ke a stiff tent to the 
floor, and a starched white shirt edged with ruffles at the 
throat and cuffs. Her hands, folded together in her lap, 
had long pallid fingers, with swollen knuckles and 
tough yellow nails. Agehad battered her features so that 
she almost resembled a man, with sharp, shrunken eyes 
and prominent creases on either side of her nose. Her 
lips, chapped and faded, had nearly disappeared. And 
her eyebrows were missing altogether. N evertheless she 
looked fierce. 

"Lock up!" she commanded. She shouted even 
though I stood only a few feet away, "Fasten the chain 
and firmly press that button on the knob! This is the first 
thing you shall do when you enter, is that dear?" 

I locked the door as directed and examined the house. 
Next to the bench on which the woman sat was a small 
round table, its legs fully concealed, much like the 
woman's, by a skin of lace. The table held a lamp, a 
transistor radio, a leather change purse with a silver 
clasp, and a telephone. A thick wooden cane coated with 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 195 


a layer of dust was propped against one side. There was 
a pari or to my right, lined with bookcases and filled with 
shabby claw-footed furniture. I n the corner of the parlor 
I saw a grand piano with its top down, piled with 
papers. The piano's bench was missing; it seemed to be 
the one on which the woman was sitting. Somewhere in 
the house a clock chimed seven times. 

"You're punctual!" the woman proclaimed. "I expect 
you shal I be so with the rent!" 

"I have a letter, madame" In my jacket pocket was a 
letter confirming my employment from MIT, which I 
had brought along to prove that I was indeed from Tech. 

She stared at the letter, then handed it back to me 
carefully, gripping it with her fingers as if it were a 
dinner plate heaped with food instead of a sheet of 
paper. She did not wear glasses, and I wondered if she'd 
read a word of it. "The last boy was always late! Still 
owes me eight dollars! Harvard boys aren't what they 
used to be! Only Harvard and Tech in this house! How's 
Tech, boy?" 

"It is very well." 

"You checked the lock?" 

"Yes, madame." 

She slapped the space beside her on the bench with 
one hand, and told me to sit down. For a moment she 
was silent. Then she intoned, as if she alone possessed 
this knowledge: 

"There is an American flag on the moon!" 

"Yes, madame." Until then I had not thought very 
much about the moon shot. It was in the newspaper, of 
course, article upon article. The astronauts had landed 
on the shores of the Sea of Tranquility, I had read, 
traveling farther than anyone in the history of 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT SO 196 


civilization. For a few hours they explored the moon's 
surface. They gathered rocks in their pockets, described 
their surroundings (a magnificent desolation, according 
to one astronaut), spoke by phone to the president, and 
planted a flag in lunar soil. The voyage was hailed as 
man's most awesome achievement. I had seen full-page 
photographs in the Globe, of the astronauts in their 
inflated costumes, and read about what certain people in 
Boston had been doing at the exact moment the 
astronauts landed, on a Sunday afternoon. A man said 
that he was operating a swan boat with a radio pressed 
to his ear; a woman had been baking rolls for her 
grandchildren. 

The woman bellowed, "A flag on the moon, boy! I 
heard it on the radio! Isn't that splendid?" 

"Yes, madame." 

But she was not satisfied with my reply. Instead she 
commanded. "Say 'splendid'!" 

I was both baffled and somewhat insulted by the 
request. It reminded me of the way I was taught 
multiplication tables as a child, repeating after the 
master, sitting cross-legged, without shoes or pencils, on 
the floor of my one-room Tollygunge school. It also 
reminded me of my wedding, when I had repeated 
endless Sanskrit verses after the priest, verses I barely 
understood, which joined me to my wife. I said nothing. 

"Say 'splendid'!" the woman bellowed once again. 

"Splendid," I murmured. I had to repeat the word the 
second time at the top of my lungs, so she could hear. I 
am soft-spoken by natureand was especially reluctant to 
raise my voice to an elderly woman whom I had met 
only moments ago, but she did not appear to be 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 197 


offended. If anything the reply pleased her because her 
next command was: 

"Go see the room!" 

I rose from the bench and mounted the narrow 
carpeted staircase. There were five doors, two on either 
side of equally narrow hallway, and one at the opposite 
end. Only one door was partly open. The room 
contained a twin bed under a sloping ceiling, a brown 
oval rug, a basin with an exposed pipe, and a chest of 
drawers. One door, painted white, led to a closet, 
another to a toilet and a tub. The walls were covered 
with gray and ivory striped paper. The window was 
open; net curtains stirred in the breeze. I lifted them 
away and inspected the view: a small back yard, with a 
few fruit trees and an empty clothesline. I was satisfied. 
From the bottom of the stairs I heard the woman 
demand, "What is your decision?" 

When I returned to the foyer and told her, she picked 
up the leather change purse on the table, opened the 
clasp, fished about with her fingers, and produced a key 
on a thin wire hoop. She informed me that there was a 
kitchen at the back of the house, accessible through the 
parlor. I was welcome to use the stove as long as I left it 
as I found it. Sheets and towels were provided, but 
keeping them clean was my own responsibility. The rent 
was due Friday mornings on the ledge above the piano 
keys. "And no lady visitors!" 

"I am a married man, madame," It was the first time I 
had announced this fact to anyone. 

But she had not heard. "No lady visitors!" she 
insisted. She introduced herself as M rs. Croft. 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT SO 198 


My wife's name was Mala. The marriage had been 
arranged by my older brother and his wife. I regarded 
the proposition with neither objection nor enthusiasm. It 
was a duty expected of me, as it was expected of every 
man. She was the daughter of a schoolteacher in 
Beleghata. I was told that she could cook, knit, 
embroider, sketch landscapes, and recite poems by 
Tagore, but these talents could not make up for the fact 
that she did not possess a fair complexion, and so a 
string of men had rejected her to her face. She was 
twenty-seven, an age when her parents had begun to 
fear that she would never marry, and so they were 
willing to ship their only child halfway across the world 
in order to save her from spinsterhood. 

For five nights we shared a bed. Each of those nights, 
after applying cold cream and braiding her hair, which 
she tied up at the end with a black cotton string, she 
turned from me and wept; she missed her parents. 
Although I would be leaving the country in a few days, 
custom dictated that she was now a part of my 
household, and for the next six weeks she was to live 
with my brother and his wife, cooking, cleaning, serving 
tea and sweets to guests. I did nothing to console her. I 
lay on my own side of the bed, reading my guidebook 
by flashlight and anticipating my journey. At times I 
thought of the tiny room on the other side of the wall 
which had belonged to my mother. Now the room was 
practically empty; the wooden pallet on which she'd 
once slept was piled with trunks and old bedding. 
Nearly six years ago, before leaving for London, I had 
watched her die on that bed, had found her playing with 
her excrement in her final days. Before we cremated her 
I had cleaned each of her fingernails with a hairpin, and 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 199 


then, because my brother could not bear it, I had 
assumed the role of eldest son, and had touched the 
flame to her temple, to release her tormented soul to 
heaven. 

The next morning I moved into the room in Mrs. Croft's 
house. When I unlocked the door I saw that she was 
sitting on the piano bench, on the same side as the 
previous evening. She wore the same black skirt, the 
same starched white blouse, and had her hands folded 
together the same way in her lap. She looked so much 
the same that I wondered if she'd spent the whole night 
on the bench. I put my suitcase upstairs, filled my flask 
with boiling water in the kitchen, and headed off to 
work. That evening when I came home from the 
university, she was still there. 

"Sitdown, boy!" She slapped the space beside her. 

I perched beside her on the bench. I had a bag of 
groceries with me—more milk, more cornflakes, and 
more bananas, for my inspection of the kitchen earlier in 
the day had revealed no spare pots, pans, or cooking 
utensils. There were only two saucepans in the 
refrigerator, both containing some orange broth, and a 
copper kettl e on the stove. 

"Good evening, madame." 

She asked me if I had checked the lock. I told her I 
had. 

For a moment she was silent. Then suddenly she 
declared, with the equal measures of disbelief and 
delight as the night before, "There's an American flag on 
the moon, boy!" 

"Yes, madame." 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT BO 200 


"A flag on the moon! Isn't that splendid?" 

I nodded, dreading what I knew was coming. "Yes, 
madame." 

"Say'splendid'!" 

This time I paused, looking to either side in case 
anyone were there to overhear me, though I knew 
perfectly well that the house was empty. I felt like an 
idiot. But it was a small enough thing to ask. "Splendid!" 

I cried out. 

Within days it became our routine. In the mornings 
when I left for the library Mrs. Croft was either hidden 
away in her bedroom, on the other side of the staircase, 
or she was sitting on the bench, oblivious to my 
presence, listening to the news or classical music on the 
radio. But each evening when I returned the same thing 
happened: she slapped the bench, ordered me to sit 
down, declared that there was a flag on the moon and 
declared that it was splendid. I said it was splendid, too, 
and then we sat in silence. As awkward as it was, and as 
endless as it felt to me then, the nightly encounter lasted 
only about ten minutes; inevitably shewould drift off to 
sleep, her head falling abruptly toward her chest, 
leaving me free to retire to my room. By then, of course, 
there was no flag on the moon. The astronauts, I had 
read in the paper, had taken it down before flying back 
to Earth, But I did not have the heart to tel I her. 

Friday morning, when my first week's rent was due, I 
went to the piano in the parlor to pi ace my money on the 
ledge. The piano keys were dull and discolored. When I 
pressed one, it made no sound at all. I had put eight one- 
dollar bills in an envelope and written Mrs. Croft's name 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 201 


on the front of it. I was not in the habit of leaving money 
unmarked and unattended. From where I stood I could 
see the profile of her tent-shaped skirt. She was sitting 
on the bench, listening to the radio. It seemed 
unnecessary to make her get up and walk all the way to 
the piano. I never saw her walking about, and assumed, 
from the cane always propped against the round table at 
her side, that she did so with difficulty. When I 
approached the bench she peered up at me and 
demanded: 

"What is your business?" 

"The rent, madame," 

"On the ledge above the piano keys!" 

"I have it here." I extended the envelope toward her, 
but her fingers, folded together in her lap, did not 
budge, I bowed slightly and lowered the envelope, so 
that it hovered just above her hands. After a moment she 
accepted, and nodded her head. 

That night when I came home, she did not slap the 
bench, but out of habit I sat beside her as usual. She 
asked me if I had checked the lock, but she mentioned 
nothing about the flag on the moon. Instead she said: 

"It was very kind of you!" 

"I beg your pardon, madame?" 

"Very kind of you!" 

She was still holding the envelope in her hands. 

On Sunday there was a knock on my door. An elderly 
woman introduced herself: she was Mrs. Croft's 
daughter, Helen. She walked into the room and looked 
at each of the walls as if for signs of change, glancing at 
the shirts that hung in the closet, the neckties draped 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT 80 202 


over the doorknob, the box of cornflakes on the chest of 
drawers, thedirty bowl and spoon in the basin. Shewas 
short and thick-waisted, with cropped silver hair and 
brightpinklipstick.Sheworeasi eev elesssummerd r ess, 
a row of white plastic beads, and spectacles on a chain 
that hung I ike a swing against her chest. The backs of her 
legs were mapped with dark blue veins, and her upper 
arms sagged I ike the flesh of a roasted eggplant. She told 
me she lived in Arlington, a town farther up 
Massachusetts Avenue. "I come once a week to bring 
M other groceries. H as she sent you packing yet?" 

"It is very well, madame." 

"Some of the boys run screaming. But I think she I ikes 
you. You're the first boarder she's ever referred to as a 
gentleman." 

"Not at all, madame." 

She looked at me, noticing my bare feet (I still felt 
strange wearing shoes indoors, and always removed 
them before entering my room), "Are you new to 
Boston?" 

" N ew to A meri ca, madame." 

"From?" She raised her eyebrows. 

"I am from Calcutta, India." 

"Is that right? We had a Brazilian fellow, about a year 
ago. You'll find Cambridge a very international city." 

I nodded, and began to wonder how long our 
conversation would last. But at that moment we heard 
M rs. Croft's electrifying voice rising up the stairs. When 
westepped into the hallway weheard her hollering: 

"You are to come dow nstai rs i mmedi ately!" 

"What is it?" Helen hollered back. 

"Immediately!" 

I put on my shoes at once. Helen sighed. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 203 


We walked down the staircase. It was too narrow for 
us to descend side by side, so I followed Helen, who 
seemed to be in no hurry, and complained at one point 
that she had a bad knee. "Have you been walking 
without your cane?" Helen called out. "You know you're 
not supposed to walk without that cane." She paused, 
resting her hand on the banister, and looked back at me. 
"She si i ps someti mes." 

For The first time Mrs. Croft seemed vulnerable. I 
pictured heron thefloor in front of the bench, flat on her 
back, staring at the ceiling, her feet pointing in opposite 
directions. But when we reached the bottom of the 
stai rcase she was sitti ng there as usual, her hands fol ded 
together in her lap. Two grocery bags were at her feet. 
When we stood before her she did not slap the bench, or 
ask us to sit down. She glared. 

"What is it, Mother?" 

"It's improper!" 

"What's improper?" 

"It is improper for a lady and gentleman who are not 
married to one another to hold a private conversation 
without a chaperone!" 

Helen said she was sixty-eight years old, old enough 
to be my mother, but Mrs. Croft insisted that Helen and I 
speak to each other downstairs, in the parlor. She added 
that it was also improper for a lady of H elen's station to 
reveal her age, and to wear a dress so high above the 
ankle. 

"For your information. Mother, it's 1969. What would 
you do if you actually left the house one day and saw a 
girl in a miniskirt?" 

M rs. Croft sniffed. "I'd have her arrested." 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT BO 204 


Helen shook her head and picked up one of the 
grocery bags. I picked up the other one, and followed 
her through the parlor and into the kitchen. The bags 
were filled with cans of soup, which Helen opened up 
one by one with a few cranks of a can opener. She tossed 
the old soup in the saucepans into the sink, rinsed the 
pans under the tap, filled them with soup from the 
newly opened cans, and put them back in the 
refrigerator. "A few years ago she could still open the 
cans herself," Helen said. "She hates that I do it for her 
now. But the piano killed her hands." She put on her 
spectacles, glanced at the cupboards, and spotted my tea 
bags. "Shall we have a cup?" 

I filled the kettle on the stove. "I beg your pardon, 
madame. The piano?" 

"She used to give lessons. For forty years. It was how 
she raised us after my father died." Helen put her hands 
on her hips, staring at the open refrigerator. She reached 
into the back, pulled out a wrapped stick of butter, 
frowned, and tossed it into the garbage. "That ought to 
do it," she said, and put the unopened cans of soup in 
the cupboard. I sat at the table and watched as Helen 
washed the dirty dishes, tied up the garbage bag, 
watered a spider plant over the sink, and poured boiling 
water into two cups. She handed one to me without 
milk, the string of the tea bag trailing over the side, and 
sat dow n at the tabl e. 

" Excuse me madam, but i s it enough?" 

Helen took a sip of her tea. Her lipstick left a smiling 
pink stain on the inside rim of the cup. "Is what 
enough?" 

"The soup in the pans. Is it enough food for Mrs. 
Croft?" 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 205 


"Shewon't eat anything else. She stopped eating solid 
after she turned one hundred. This was, let's see, three 
years ago." 

I was mortified. I had assumed Mrs. Croft was in her 
eighties, perhaps as old as ninety. I had never known a 
person who lived for over a century. That this person 
was a widow who lived alone mortified me further still. 
It was widowhood that had driven my own mother 
insane. My father, who worked as a clerk at the General 
Post Office of Calcutta, died of encephalitis when I was 
sixteen. My mother refused to adjust to life without him; 
instead she sank deeper into the world of darkness from 
which neither I, nor my brother, nor concerned relatives, 
nor psychiatric clinics on Rash Behari Avenuecould save 
her. What pained me most was to see her unguarded, to 
hear her burp after meals or expel gas in front of 
company without the slightest embarrassment. After my 
father's death my brother abandoned his schooling and 
began to work in the jute mill he would eventually 
manage, in order to keep the household running. And so 
it was my job to sit by my mother's feet and study for 
my exams as she counted and recounted the bracelets on 
her arm as if they were beads of an abacus. We tried to 
keep an eye on her. Once she had wandered half naked 
to the tram depot beforewewereableto bring her inside 
again. 

"I am happy to warm Mrs. Croft's soup in the 
evenings," I suggested, removing the tea bag from my 
cup and squeezing out the liquor. "It's no trouble." 

Helen looked at her watch, stood up, and poured the 
rest of her tea into the sink. "I wouldn't if I were you. 
That's the sort of thing that would kill her altogether." 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT 80 206 


That evening, when Helen had gone back to Arlington 
and Mrs. Croft and I were alone again, I began to worry. 
Now that I knew how very old she was, I worried that 
something would happen to her in the middle of the 
night, or when I was out during the day. As vigorous as 
her voice was, and imperious as she seemed, I knew that 
even a scratch or a cough could kill a person that old; 
each day she lived, I knew, was something of a miracle. 
Although Helen had seemed friendly enough, a small 
part of me worried that she might accuse me of 
negligence if anything were to happen. Helen didn't 
seem worried. She came and went, bringing soup for 
M rs. Croft, one Sunday after the next. 

I n this manner the six weeks of that summer passed. I 
came home each evening, after my hours at the library, 
and spent a few minutes on the piano bench with Mrs. 
Croft. I gave her a bit of my company, and assured her 
that I had checked the lock, and told her that the flag on 
the moon was splendid. Some evenings I sat beside her 
long after she had drifted off to sleep, still in aweon how 
many years she had spent on this earth. At times I tried 
to picture the world she had been born into, in 1866— a 
world, I imagined, filled with women in long black 
skirts, and chaste conversations in the parlor. Now, 
when I looked at her hands with their swollen knuckles 
folded together in her lap, I imagined them smooth and 
slim, striking the piano keys. At times I came downstairs 
before going to sleep, to make sure she was sitting 
upright o the bench, or was safe in her bedroom. On 
Fridays I made sure to put rent in her hands. There was 
nothing I could do for her beyond these simple gestures. 

I was not her son, and apart from those eight dollars, I 
owed her nothing. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 207 


At the end of August, Mala's passport and green card 
were ready. I received a telegram with her flight 
information; my brother's house in Calcutta had no 
telephone. Around that time I also received a letter from 
her, written only a few days after we had parted. There 
was no salutation: addressing me by name would have 
assumed an intimacy we had not yet discovered. It 
contained only a few lines. "I write in English in 
preparation for the journey. Here I am very much lonely. 

I sit very cold there. Is there snow. Yours, Mala." 

I was not touched by her words. We had spent only a 
handful of days in each other's company. And yet we 
were bound together; for six weeks she had worn an i ron 
bangle on her wrist, and applied vermilion powder to 
the part in her hair, to signify to the world that she was a 
bride. In those six weeks I regarded her arrival as I 
would the arrival of a coming month, or season — 
something inevitable, but meaningless at the time. So 
little did I know her that, while details of her face 
sometimes rose to my memory, I could not conjure up 
the whole of it. 

A few days after receiving the letter, as I was walking 
to work in the morning, I saw an Indian woman on the 
other side of the Massachusetts Avenue, wearing a sari 
with its free end nearly dragging on the footpath, and 
pushing a child in a stroller. An American woman with a 
small black dog on a leash was walking to one side of 
her. Suddenly the dog began barking. From the other 
side of the street I watched as the Indian woman, 
startled, stopped in her path, at which point the dog 
leapt up and seized the end of the sari between its teeth. 
The American woman scolded the dog, appeared to 
apologize, and walked quickly away, leaving the Indian 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT BO 208 


woman to fix her sari in the middle of the footpath, and 
quiet her crying child. Shedid not see me standing there, 
and eventually she continued on her way. Such a 
mishap, I realized that morning, would soon be my 
concern. It was my duty to take care of M ala, to wel come 
her and protect her. I would have to by her her first pair 
of snow boots, her first winter coat. I would have to tell 
her which streets to avoid, which way the traffic came, 
tell her to wear her sari so that the free end did not drag 
on the footpath. A five-mile separation from her parents, 
I recalled with some irritation, had caused her to weep. 

Unlike Mala, I was used to it all by then: used to 
cornflakes and milk, used to Helen's visits, used to 
sitting on the bench with Mrs. Croft. The only thing I 
was not used to was Mala. Nevertheless I did what I had 
to do. I went to the housing office at MIT and found a 
furnished apartment a few blocks away, with a double 
bed and a private kitchen and bath, for forty dollars a 
week. One last Friday I handed Mrs. Croft eight one- 
dollar bills in an envelope, brought my suitcase 
downstairs, and informed her that I was moving. She 
put my key into her change purse. The last thing she 
asked me to do was hand her the cane propped against 
the table, so that she could walk to the door and lock it 
behind me. "Good-bye, then," she said and retreated 
back into the house. I did not expect any display of 
emotion, but I was disappointed all the same. I was only 
a boarder, a man who paid her a bit of money and 
passed in and out of her home for six weeks. Compared 
to a century it was no time at all. 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 209 


At the airport I recognized Mala immediately. The free 
end of her sari did not drag on the floor, but was draped 
in a sign of bridal modesty over her head, just as it had 
draped my mother until the day my father died. Her 
thin brown arms were stacked with gold bracelets, a 
small red circle was painted on her forehead, and the 
edges of her feet were tinted with a decorative red dye. I 
did not embrace her, or kiss her, or take her hand. 
Instead I asked her, speaking Bengali for the first time in 
America, if she was hungry. 

She hesitated, then nodded yes. 

I told her I had prepared some egg curry at home. 
"What did they give you to eat on the plane?" 

"I didn't eat." 

"All the way from Calcutta?" 

"Themenu said oxtail soup." 

"But surely there were other items." 

"The thought of eating an ox's tail made me lose my 
appetite." 

When we arrived home, Mala opened up one of her 
suitcases, and presented me with two pullover sweaters, 
both made with bright blue wool, which she had knitted 
in the course of our separation, one with a V neck, the 
other covered with cables. I tried them on; both were 
right under the arms. She had also brought me two new 
pairs of drawstring pajamas, a letter from my brother, 
and a packet of loose Darjeeling tea. I had no present for 
her apart from the egg curry. We sat at a bare table, each 
of us staring at our plates. We ate with our hands, 
another thing I had not yet done in America. 

"The house is nice," she said. "Also the egg curry." 
With her left hand she held the end of her sari to her 
chest, so it would not slip off her head. 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT SO 210 


"I don't know many recipes." 

She nodded, peeling the skin off each of her potatoes 
before eating them. At one point the sari slipped to her 
shoulders. She readjusted it at once. 

"There's no need to cover your head," I said. "I don't 
mind. It doesn't matter here." 

She kept it covered anyway. 

I waited to get used to her, to her presence at my side, 
at my table and in my bed, but a week later we were still 
strangers. I still was not used to coming home to an 
apartment that smelled of steamed rice, and finding that 
the basin in the bathroom was always wiped clean, our 
two toothbrushes lying side by side, a cake of Pears soap 
from India resting in the soap dish. I was not used to the 
fragrance of the coconut oil she rubbed every other night 
into her scalp, or the delicate sound her bracelets made 
as she moved about the apartment. In the morning she 
was always awake before I was. The first morning when 
I came into the kitchen she had heated up the leftovers 
and sat a plate with a spoonful of salt on its edge on the 
table, assuming I would eat rice for breakfast, as most 
Bengali husbands did. I told her cereal would do, and 
the next morning when I came into the kitchen she had 
already poured the cornflakes into my bowl. One 
morning she walked with me down Massachusetts 
Avenue to MIT, where I gave her a short tour of the 
campus. On the way we stopped at a hardware store and 
I made a copy of the key, so that she could let herself 
into the apartment. The next morning before I left to 
work she asked me for a few dollars. I parted with them 
reluctantly but I knew that this, too, was now normal. 
When I came home from work there was a potato peeler 
in the kitchen drawer, and a tablecloth on the table, and 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 211 


chicken curry made with fresh garlic and ginger on the 
stove. We did not have a television in those days. After 
dinner I read the newspaper, while Mala sat at the 
kitchen table, working on a cardigan for herself with 
more of the bright blue wool, or writing letters home. 

At the end of our first week, on Friday, I suggested 
going out. Mala set down her knitting and disappeared 
into the bathroom. When she emerged I regretted the 
suggestion; she had put on a clean silk sari and extra 
bracelets, and coiled her hair with a flattering side part 
on top of her head. She was prepared as if for a party, or 
at very least for the cinema, but I had no such 
destination in mind. The evening air was balmy. We 
walked several blocks down Massachusetts Avenue, 
looking into the windows of restaurants and shops. 
Then, without thinking, I led her down the quiet street 
where for so many nights I had walked alone. 

"This is where I lived before you came," I said, 
stopping at Mrs. Croft's chain-1 ink fence. 

"In such a big house?" 

"I had a small room upstairs. Attheback." 

"Who else lives there?" 

"A very old woman." 

"With her family?" 

"Alone." 

" But w ho takes care of her?" 

I opened the gate." For the most part she takes care of 
herself." 

I wondered if Mrs. Croft would remember me: I 
wondered if she had a new boarder to sit with her on the 
bench each evening. When I pressed the bell I expected 
the same long wait as that day of our first meeting, when 
I did not have a key. But this time the door was opened 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT K> 212 


almost immediately, by Helen. Mrs. Croft was not sitting 
on the bench. The bench was gone. 

"Hello there," Helen said, smiling with her bright 
pink lips at Mala. "Mother's in the parlor. Will you be 
visiting awhile?" 

"Asyou wish, madame." 

"Then I think I'll run to the store, if you don't mind. 
She had a little accident. We can't lave her alone these 
days, not even for a mi nute." 

I locked the door after Helen and walked into the 
parlor. Mrs. Croft was lying flat on her back, her head on 
a peach-colored cushion, a thin white quilt spread over 
her body. H er hands were folded together on top of her 
chest. When she saw me she pointed at the sofa, and told 
me to sit down. I took my place as directed, but Mala 
wandered over to the piano and sat on the bench, which 
was now positioned where it belonged. 

"I broke my hip!" Mrs. Croft announced, as if no time 
had passed. 

"Oh dear, madame." 

"I fell off the bench." 

"I am so sorry, madame." 

"It was the middle of the night! Do you know what I 
did, boy?" 

I shook my head. 

"I called the police!" 

She stared up at the ceiling and grinned sedately, 
exposing a crowded row of long grey teeth. N ot one was 
missing. "What do you say to that, boy?" 

As stunned as I was, I knew what I had to say. With 
no hesitation at all, I cried out, "Splendid!" 

Mala laughed then. Her voice was full of kindness, 
her eyes bright with amusement. I had never heard her 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 213 


laugh before, and it was loud enough that Mrs. Croft 
had heard, too. She turned to Mai a and glared. 

"Who is she, boy?" 

"She is my wife, madame." 

Mrs. Croft pressed her had at an angle against the 
cushion to get a better look. "Can you play the piano?" 

"No, madame," Mala replied. 

"Then stand up!" 

Mala rose to her feet, adjusting the end of her sari 
over her head, and holding it to her chest, and, for the 
first time since her arrival, I felt sympathy. I 
remembered my first days in London, learning how to 
take the Tube to Russell Square, riding an escalator for 
the first time, being unableto understand that when the 
man cried "piper" it meant "paper," being unable to 
decipher, for a whole year, that the conductor said 
"mind the gap" as the train pulled away from each 
station. Like me, Mala had traveled far from home, not 
knowing where she was going, or what she would find, 
for no reason other than to be my wife. As strange as it 
seemed, I knew in my heart that one day her death 
would affect me, and stranger still, that mine would 
affect her. I wanted somehow to explain this to Mrs. 
Croft, who was still scrutinizing Mala from top to toe 
with what seemed to be placid disdain. I wondered if 
Mrs. Croft had ever seen a woman in a sari, with a dot 
painted on her forehead and bracelets stacked on her 
wrists. I wondered what she would object to. I 
wondered if she could see the red dye still vivid on 
Mala's feet, all but obscured by the bottom edge of her 
sari. At last Mrs. Croft declared, with the equal measures 
of disbelief and delight I knew well: 

"She is a perfect lady!" 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT SO 214 


Now it was I who laughed. I did so quietly, and Mrs. 
Croft did not hear me. But Mala had heard, and, for the 
fi rst ti me, we Iooked at each other and smi Ied. 

I like to think of that moment in Mrs. Croft's parlor as 
the moment when the distance between Mala and me 
began to lessen. Although we were not yet fully in love, I 
like to think of the months that followed as a 
honeymoon of sorts. Together we explored the city and 
met other Bengalis, some of whom are still friends today. 
We discovered that a man named Bill sold fresh fish on 
Prospect Street, and that a shop i n H arvard square cal led 
Cardullo's sold bay leaves and cloves. In the evenings 
we walked to the Charles River to watch sailboats drift 
across the water, or had ice cream cones in Harvard 
Yard. We bought an instamatic camera with which to 
document our life together, and I took pictures of her 
posing in front of the Prudential building, so that she 
could send them to her parents. At night we kissed, shy 
at first but quickly bold, and discovered pleasure and 
solace in each other's arms. I told her about my voyage 
on SS Roma, and about Finsbury Park and YMCA, and 
my evenings on the bench with Mrs. Croft. When I told 
her stories about my mother, she wept. It was Mala who 
consoled me when, reading the Globe one evening, I 
came across M rs. Croft's obituary. I had not thought of 
her in several months — by then those six weeks of the 
summer were already a remote interlude in my past — 
but when I learned of her death I was stricken, so much 
so that when Mala looked up from her knitting she 
found me staring at the wall, the newspaper neglected in 
my lap, unableto speak. Mrs. Croft's was the first death 



INTERPRETER OF MALADIES 8S> 215 


I mourned in America,, for hers was the first life I had 
admired; she had left this world at last, ancient and 
alone, never to return. 

As for me, I have not strayed much farther. M ala and 
I live in a town about twenty miles from Boston, on a 
tree-lined street much like Mrs. Croft's, in a house we 
own, with a garden that saves us from buying tomatoes 
in summer, and room for guests. We are American 
citizens now, so that we can collect social security when 
it is time. Though we visit Calcutta every few years, and 
bring back more drawstring pajamas and Darjeeling tea, 
we have decided to grow old here. I work in a small 
college library. We have a son who attends Harvard 
University. Mala no longer drapes the end of her sari 
over her head, or weeps at night for her parents, but 
occasionally she weeps for our son. So we drive to 
Cambridge to visit him, or bring him home for a 
weekend, so that he can eat rice with his hands, and 
speak in Bengali, things we sometimes worry he will 
never do after we die. 

Whenever we make that drive, I always make it a 
point to take Massachusetts Avenue, in spite of the 
traffic. I barely recognize the buildings now, but each 
time I am there I return instantly to those six weeks as if 
they wereonly the other day and I slow down and point 
to Mrs. Croft's street, saying to my son, here was my 
first home in America, where I lived with a woman who 
was 103. "Remember?" Mala says, and smiles, amazed, 
as I am, that there was ever a time that we were 
strangers. My son always expresses his astonishment, 
not at Mrs. Croft's age, but at how little I paid in rent, a 
fact nearly as inconceivable to him as a flag on the moon 
was to a woman born in 1866. In my son's eyes I seethe 



THE THIRD AND FINAL CONTINENT SO 216 


ambition that had first hurled me across the world. In a 
few years he will graduate and pave his way, alone and 
unprotected. But I remind myself that he has a father 
who is still living, a mother who is happy and strong. 
Whenever he is discouraged I tell him that if I can 
survive on three continents than there is no obstacle he 
cannot conquer. While the astronauts, heroes forever, 
spent mere hours on the moon, I have remained in this 
new world for nearly thirty years. I know that my 
achievement is quite ordinary. I am not the only man to 
seek his fortune far from home, and certainly I am not 
the first. Still, there are times I am bewildered by each 
mile I have traveled, each meal I have eaten, each person 
I have known, each room in which I have slept. As 
ordinary as it all appears, there are times when it is 
beyond my imagination. 




Jhumpa Lahiri 








Biographies Collected 
Throughout The Web 


J hum pa lahiri was born 1967 in London, England, 
and raised in Rhode Island. She is a graduate of 
Barnard College, where she received a B.A. in English 
literature, and of Boston University, where she received 
an M.A. in English, M.A. in Creative Writing and M.A. 
in Comparative Studies in Literature and the Arts, and a 
Ph.D. in Renaissance Studies. She has taught creative 
writing at Boston University and the Rhode Island 
School of Design. Her debut collection, Interpreter of 
M aladies, won the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for fiction. It was 
translated into twenty-nine languages and became a 
bestseller both in the United States and abroad. In 
addition to the Pulitzer, it received the 
PEN/ Hemingway Award, the New Yorker Debut of the 
Year award, an American Academy of Arts and Letters 
Addison Metcalf Award, and a nomination for the Los 
Angeles Times Book Prize. Lahiri was awarded a 
Guggenheim Fellowship in 2002. The Namesake is 
Jhumpa Lahiri'sfirst novel. She lives in New York with 
her husband and son. 


Jhumpa Lahiri (born Nilanjana Sudeshna on 11 July 
1967) is an American author of Bengali Indian descent. 
Lahiri's debut short story collection, Interpreter of 
M aladies (1999), won the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, 
and her first novel, The Namesake (2003), was adapted 
i nto the popul ar fi I m of the same name. 

Lahiri's writing is characterized by her "plain" 
language and her characters, often Indian immigrants to 
America who must navigate between the cultural values 
of their birthplace and their adopted home. 


* * * 


Lahiri was born in London, England, the daughter of 
Indian immigrants. Her family moved to the United 
States when she was three; Lahiri considers herself an 
American, stating, "I wasn't born here, but I might as 
well have been." Lahiri grew up in Kingston, Rhode 
Island, where her father worked as a librarian at the 
University of Rhode Island; the protagonist of Lahiri's 
story "The Third and Final Continent" is based on her 
father. Lahiri's mother wanted her children to grow up 
knowing of their Bengali heritage, and her family often 
visited relatives in Calcutta, India. 

When she began kindergarten in Kingston, Lahiri's 
teacher decided to call her by her pet name, Jhumpa, 
because it was easier to pronounce than her „good 
names". Lahiri recalled, "I always felt so embarrassed by 



my name[...] You feel like you're causing someone pain 
just by being who you are." Lahiri's ambivalence over 
her identity was the inspiration for the ambivalence of 
Gogol, the protagonist of her novel The N amesake, over 
his unusual name. Lahiri graduated from South 
Kingstown High School, and received her B.A. in 
English literature from Barnard College in 1989. 

Lahiri then received multiple degrees from Boston 
University: an M.A. in English, an M.A. in Creative 
Writing, an M.A. in Comparative Literature and a Ph.D. 
in Renaissance Studies. She took up a fellowship at 
Provincetown's Fine Arts Work Center, which lasted for 
the next two years (1997—1998). Lahiri taught creative 
writing at Boston University and the Rhode Island 
School of Design. 

During her six years at Boston University, Lahiri worked 
on short stories, nine of which were collected in her 
debut book, Interpreter of Maladies (1999). The stories 
address sensitive dilemmas in the lives of Indians or 
Indian immigrants, with themes such as marital 
difficulties, miscarriages, and the disconnection between 
first and second generation United States immigrants. 
Lahiri later wrote, "When I first started writing I was not 
conscious that my subject was the Indian-American 
experience. What drew me to my craft was the desire to 
force the two worlds I occupied to mingle on the page as 
I was not brave enough, or mature enough, to allow in 
life." The collection was praised by American critics, but 
received mixed reviews in India, where reviewers were 
alternately enthusiastic and upset Lahiri had "not 
paint[ed] Indians in a more positive light." Interpreter of 



M aladies won the 2000 Pulitzer Prize for fiction (only the 
seventh time a story collection had won the award), and 
sold 600,000 copies. 

In 2003, Lahiri published The Namesake, her highly- 
anticipated first novel. The book spans more than thirty 
years in the life of a fictional family, the Gangulis. The 
Calcutta-born parents immigrated to thellnited States as 
young adults, and their children, Gogol and Sonia, grow 
up in the United States experiencing the constant 
generational and cultural gap between their parents and 
them. A film adaptation of The N amesake was released in 
March 2007, directed by Mira Nair and starring Kal Penn 
as Gogol and Bollywood stars Tabu and Irrfan Khan as 
his parents. 

Lahiri's second collection of short stories, 
Unaccustomed Earth, was released on April 1, 2008. Upon 
its publication, Unaccustomed Earth achieved the rare 
distinction of debuting on The New York Times best 
seller list in the number 1 slot. New York Times Book 
Review editor Dwight Garner stated, "It's hard to 
remember the last genuinely serious, well-written work 
of fiction — particularly a book of stories —that leapt 
straight to No. 1; it's a powerful demonstration of 
Lahiri's newfound commercial clout." 

In 2001, Lahiri married Alberto Vourvoulias-Bush, a 
journalist who was then Deputy Editor of TIME Latin 
America. Lahiri lives in Brooklyn, New York with her 
husband and their two children, Octavio (b. 2002) and 
Noor (b. 2005). 

Since 2005, Lahiri has been a Vice President of the 
PEN American Center, an organization designed to 



promote friendship and intellectual cooperation among 
writers. 

Awards 

1993 —Tran sAtl antic Award from the Henfield 
Foundation 

1999— O. Henry Award for short story .interpreter of 
Maladies" 

1999— PEN/ Hemingway Award (Best Fiction Debut of 
the Y ear) for „ I nterpreter of M al ad i es" 

1999— ..Interpreter of Maladies" selected as one of Best 
American Short Stories 

2000— Addison Metcalf Award from the American 
Academy of Arts and Letters 

2000 —The New Yorker's Best Debut of the Year for 
„ I nterp refer of M al ad i es" 

2000—Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for her debut 
I nterpreter of M al ad i es 

2000 —James Beard Foundation's M.F.K. Fisher 
Distinguished Writing Award for ..Indian Takeout" in 
Food & Wi ne M agazi ne 
2002— Guggenheim Fellowship 

Works 

Short story collections 

I nterpreter of M aladies (1999) 

Unaccustomed Earth (2008) 

Novels 

The N amesake (2003) 



Short stories 

"Nobody's Business" (11 March 2001, The New 
Yorker) ("The Best American Short Stories 2002") 

"H ell-H eaven" (24 M ay 2004, The N ew Yorker) 

"Once In A Lifetime" (1May 2006, The New Yorker) 
"Year's End" (24 December 2007, The N ew Yorker) 


* * * 


Growing up in America under the supervision of a 
mother who wanted to raise her children to be Indian, it 
is no surprise that Jhumpa Lahiri puts so large an 
emphasis on the'stories of Indians in what for them is a 
strange land' (Rothstein). Publishing her first book, 
Interpreter ofMaladies, in 1999, Lahiri has becomea quick 
international success and an award-winning author. 
Jhumpa Lahiri was born in 1967 in London but raised in 
South Kingstown, Rl by her father, a librarian, and her 
mother, a teacher. The influence of frequent childhood 
visits to India and parents who are still a part of the 
Indian world despite their immigration to America 
thirty years ago shaped her book (People Weekly). 
Lahiri's role as a writer developed in grade school when 
she began to '[write] 10-page "novels"' during recess 
with her friends' (Patel). Later in her school years, Lahiri 
busied herself with the school newspaper. After 
graduating from Barnard college, Lahiri continued at 
Boston University to obtain her masters degrees in 
English, comparative literature, and creative writing and 
later her PhD in Renaissance studies. Following the PhD 



program, she did a two-year fellowship at 
Provincetown's Fine Arts Work Center. 

During completion of her doctorate thesis in 1997, 
she worked for Boston magazine as an intern and was 
given little trust'as a real writer' (Flynn). The joke seems 
to be on Boston magazine and any others who doubted 
her after the release of her first book which began to 
receive awards almost immediately following 
publishing. Among the first received in 1999 was the 
PEN/ Flemingway award for the best fiction debut of the 
year. The title story, 'Interpreter of Maladies,' was 
chosen for the O Flenry Award for best American short 
stories. Lahiri was a recipient of the Transatlantic 
Review award from FH enfield foundation and the fiction 
prize from Louisville Review. The New Yorker has 
published three of her stories and named her as 'one of 
the 20 best writers under the age of 40.' The greatest 
tribute to her talent thus far has been the award for the 
2000 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. She is the first Indian 
woman to receivethis award. 

In January of 2001, Lahiri married the deputy editor 
of Time Latin America, Alberto Vourvoulias-Bush. The 
author arranged a traditional Bengali wedding in the 
Singhi Palace in Calcutta, a place she has never 
considered 'a foreign city [since she] has been coming 
[there] since [she] was two years old' ("Oh Calcutta!"). 
Jhumpa Lahiri continues work on a second book but said 
that she could not comment because 'it's only after [she] 
finishes something that [she] can actually describe it in 
words' (Aguiar). 
