Coincidences, writers are told (usually by the critics) must be avoided, although in truth the real
world is full of incidents that in themselves are unbelievable. Everyone has had an experience that if
they wrote about it would appear to others as pure fiction.
The same week that the headlines in the world newspapers read “Russia invades Afghanistan,
America to withdraw from Moscow Olympics” there also appeared a short obituary in The Times for
the distinguished Professor of English at the University of Budapest. “A man who was born and died
in his native Budapest and whose reputation remains assured by his brilliant translation of the works
of Shakespeare into his native Hungarian.
Although some linguists consider his Coriolanus immature they universally acknowledge his
Hamlet to be a translation of genius.”
Nearly a decade after the Hungarian Revolution I had the chance to participate in a student
athletics meeting in Budapest.
The competition was scheduled to last for a full week so I felt there would be an opportunity
to find out a little about the country. The team new in to Ferihegy Airport on the Sunday night and we
were taken immediately to the Hotel If ushag. (I learned later that the word meant youth in Hungarian).
Having settled in, most of the team went to bed early as their opening round heats were the following
day.
Breakfast the next morning comprised of milk, toast and an egg, served in three acts with long
intervals between each. Those of us who were running that afternoon skipped lunch for fear that a
matinee performance might cause us to miss our events completely.
Two hours before the start of the meeting, we were taken by bus to the Nep stadium and
unloaded outside the dressing rooms (I always feel they should be called undressing rooms). We
changed into track suits and sat around on benches anxiously waiting to be called. After what seemed
to be an interminable time but was in fact only a few minutes, an official appeared and led us out on
to the track. As it was the opening day of competition, the stadium was packed. When I had finished
my usual warm-up of jogging, sprinting and some light callisthenics, the loudspeaker announced the
start of the 100m race in three languages. I stripped off my track suit and ran over to the start.
When called, I pressed my spikes against the blocks and waited nervously for the starter’s
pistol.
Felkeszulni, Kesz – bang. Ten seconds later the race was over and the only virtue of coming
last was that it left me six free days to investigate the Hungarian capital.
Walking around Budapest reminded me of my childhood days in Bristol just after the war, but
with one noticeable difference. As well as the bombed-out buildings, there was row upon row of
bullet holes in some of the walls. The revolution, although eight years past, was still much in
evidence, perhaps because the nationals did not want anyone to forget. The people on the streets had
lined faces, stripped of all emotion, and they shuffled rather than walked, leaving the impression of a
nation of old men. If you inquired innocently why, they told you there was nothing to hurry for, or to
be happy about, although they always seemed to be thoughtful with each other.
On the third day of the games, I returned to the Nep stadium to support a friend of mine who
was competing in the semi-finals of the 400m hurdles which was the first event that afternoon. Having
a competitor’s pass, I could sit virtually anywhere in the half-empty arena. I chose to watch the race
from just above the final bend, giving me a good view of the home straight. I sat down on the wooden
bench without paying much attention to the people on either side of me. The race began and as my
friend hit the bend crossing the seventh hurdle with only three hurdles to cover before the finishing
line, I stood and cheered him heartily all the way down the home straight. He managed to come in
third, ensuring himself a place in the final the next day. I sat down again and wrote out the detailed
result in my programme. I was about to leave, as there were no British competitors in the hammer or
the pole vault, when a voice behind me said:
“You are English?”
“Yes,” I replied, turning in the direction from which the question had been put.
An elderly gentleman looked up at me.
He wore a threepiece suit that must have been out of date when his father owned it, and even
lacked the possible virtue that some day the style might come back into fashion. The leather patches
on the elbows left me in no doubt that my questioner was a bachelor for they could only have been
sewn on by a maneither that or one had to conclude he had elbows in odd places.
The length of his trousers revealed that his father had been two inches taller than he. As for the
man himself, he had a few strands of white hair, a walrus moustache, and ruddy cheeks. His tired blue
eyes were perpetually half-closed like the shutter of a camera that has just been released. His
forehead was so lined that he might have been any age between fifty and seventy. The overall
impression was of a cross between a tram inspector and an out-of-work violinist.
I sat down for a second time.
“I hope you didn’t mind my asking?” he added.
“Of course not,” I said.
“I t’s just that I have so little opportunity to converse with an Englishman. So when I spot one I
always grasp the nettle. Is that the right colloquial expression?”
“Yes,” I said, trying to think how many Hungarian words I knew. Yes, No, Good morning,
Goodbye, I am lost, Help “You are in the student games?”
“Were, not are,” I said. “I departed somewhat rapidly on Monday.”
“Because you were not rapid enough, perhaps?”
I laughed, again admiring his command of my first language.
“Why is your English so excellent?” I inquired.
“I’m afraid it’s a little neglected,” the old man replied. “But they still allow me to teach the
subject at the University. I must confess to you that I have absolutely no interest in sport, but these
occasions always afford me the opportunity to capture someone like yourself and oil the rusty
machine, even if only for a few minutes.” He gave me a tired smile but his eyes were now alight.
“What part of England do you hail from?” For the first time his pronouncement faltered as
“hail” came out as ‘heel”.
“Somerset,” I told him.
“Ah,” he said, “perhaps the most beautiful county in England.” I smiled, as most foreigners
never seem to travel much beyond Stratford-on-Avon or Oxford. “To drive across the Mendips,” he
continued, “through perpetually green hilly countryside and to stop at Cheddar to see Gough’s caves,
at Wells to be amused by the black swans ringing the bell on the Cathedral wall, or at Bath to admire
the lifestyle of classical Rome, and then perhaps to go over the county border and on to Devon... Is
Devon even more beautiful than Somerset, in your opinion?”
“Never,” said 1.
“Perhaps you are a little prejudiced,” he laughed. “Now let me see if I can recall:
Of the western counties there are seven But the most glorious is surely that of Devon.
Perhaps Hardy, like you, was prejudiced and could think only of his beloved Exmoor, the
village of Tiverton and Drake’s Plymouth.”
“Which is your favourite county?” I asked.
“The North Riding of Yorkshire has always been underrated, in my opinion,” replied the old
man. “When people talk of Yorkshire, I suspect Leeds, Sheffield and Barnsley spring to mind.
Coal mining and heavy industry.
Visitors should travel and see the dales there; they will find them as different as chalk from
cheese.
Lincolnshire is too net and so much of the Midlands must now be spoilt by sprawling towns.
The Birminghams of this world hold no appeal for me. But in the end I come down in favour of
Worcestershire and Warwickshire, quaint old English villages nestling in the Cotswolds and crowned
by Stratford-upon-Avon. How I wish I could have been in England in 1959 while my countrymen
were recovering from the scars of revolution. Olivier performing Coriolanus, another man who did
not want to show his scars.”
“I saw the performance,” I said. “I went with a school party.”
“Lucky boy. I translated the play into Hungarian at the age of nineteen.
Reading over my work again last year made me aware I must repeat the exercise before I die.”
“You have translated other Shakespeare plays?”
“All but three, I have been leaving Hamlet to last, and then I shall return to Coriolanus and
start again. As you are a student, am I permitted to ask which University you attend?”
“Oxford.”
“And your College?”
“Brasenose.”
“Ah. B.N.C. How wonderful to be a few yards away from the Bodleian, the greatest library in
the world. If I had been born in England I should have wanted to spend my days at All Souls, that is
just opposite B.N.C., is it not?”
“That’s right.”
The professor stopped talking while we watched the next race, the first semi-final of the 1,500
metres. The winner was Anfras Patovich, a Hungarian, and the partisan crowd went 80159 wild with
delight.
“That’s what I call support,” I said.
“Like Manchester United when they have scored the winning goal in the Cup Final. But my
fellow countrymen do not cheer because the Hungarian was first,” said the old man.
“No?” I said, somewhat surprised.
“Oh, no, they cheer because he beat the Russian.”
“I hadn’t even noticed,” I said.
“There is no reason why you should, but their presence is always in the forefront of our minds
and we are rarely given the opportunity to see them beaten in public.”
I tried to steer him back to a happier subject. “And before you had been elected to All Souls,
which college would you have wanted to attend?”
“As an undergraduate, you mean?”
“Yes.”
“Undoubtedly Magdalen is the most beautiful college. It has the distinct advantage of being
situated on the River Cherwell; and in any case I confess a weakness for perpendicular architecture
and a love of Oscar Wilde.” The conversation was interrupted by the sound of a pistol and we
watched the second semi-final of the 1,500 metres which was won by Orentas of the U.S.S.R. and the
crowd showed its disapproval more obviously this time, clapping in such a way that left hands
passed by right without coming into contact. I found myselfjoining in on the side of the Hungarians.
The scene made the old man lapse into a sad silence. The last race of the day was won by Tim
Johnston of England and I stood and cheered unashamedly. The Hungarian crowd clapped politely.
I turned to say goodbye to the professor, who had not spoken for some time.
“How long are you staying in Budapest?” he asked.
“The rest of the week. I return to England on Sunday.”
“Could you spare the time to join an old man for dinner one night?”
“I should be delighted.”
“How considerate of you,” he said, and he wrote out his full name and address in capital
letters on the back of my programme and returned it to me. “Why don’t we say tomorrow at seven?
And if you have any old newspapers or magazines do bring them with you,” he said looking a little
sheepish. “And I shall quite understand if you have to change your plans.”
I spent the next morning looking over St. Matthias Church and the ancient fortress, two of the
buildings that showed no evidence of the revolution. I then took a short trip down the Danube before
spending the afternoon supporting the swimmers at the Olympic pool. At six I left the pool and went
back to my hotel. I changed into my team blazer and grey slacks, hoping I looked smart enough for my
distinguished host. I locked my door, and started towards the lift and then remembered. I returned to
my room to pick up the pile of newspapers and magazines I had collected from the rest of the team.
Finding the professor’s home was not as easy as I had expected. After meandering around
cobbled streets and waving the professor’s address at several passers-by, I was finally directed to an
old apartment block. I ran up the three flights of the wooden staircase in a few leaps and bounds,
wondering how long the climb took the professor every day. I stopped at the door that displayed his
number and knocked.
The old man answered immediately as if he had been standing there, waiting by the door. I
noticed that he was wearing the same suit he had had on the previous day.
“I am sorry to be late,” I said.
“No matter, my own students also find me hard to find the first time,” he said, grasping my
hand. He paused. “Bad to use the same word twice in the same sentence. ‘Locate’ would have been
better, wouldn’t it?”
He trotted on ahead of me, not waiting for my reply, a man obviously used to living on his
own. He led me down a small, dark corridor into his drawing room. I was shocked by its size. Three
sides were covered with indifferent prints and watercolours, depicting English scenes, while the
fourth wall was dominated by a large bookcase. I could spot Shakespeare, Dickens, Austin, Trollope,
Hardy, even Waugh and Graham Greene. On the table was a faded copy of the New Statesman and I
looked round to see if we were on our own, but there seemed to be no sign of a wife or child either in
person or picture, and indeed the table was only set for two.
The old man turned and stared with childish delight at my pile of newspapers and magazines.
“Punch, Time and the Observer, a veritable feast,” he declared gathering them into his arms
before placing them lovingly on his bed in the corner of the room.
The professor then opened a bottle of Szurkebarat and left me to look at the pictures while he
prepared the meal.
He slipped away into an alcove which was so small that I had not realised the room contained
a kitchenette. He continued to bombard me with questions about England, many of which I was quite
unable to answer.
A few minutes later he stepped back into the room, requesting me to take a seat. “Do be
seated,” he said, on reflection. “I do not wish you to remove the seat. I wish you to sit on it.” He put a
plate in front of me which had on it a leg of something that might have been a chicken, a piece of
salami and a tomato. I felt sad, not because the food was inadequate, but because he believed it to be
plentiful.
After dinner, which despite my efforts to eat slowly and hold him in conversation, did not take
up much time, the old man made some coffee which tasted bitter and then filled a pipe before we
continued our discussion. We talked of Shakespeare and his views on A. L. Rowse and then he turned
to politics.
“Is it true,” the professor asked, “that England will soon have a Labour government?”
“The opinion polls seem to indicate as much,” I said.
“I suppose the British feel that Sir Alec Douglas-Home is not swinging enough for the sixties,”
said the professor, now puffing vigorously away at his pipe. He paused and looked up at me through
the smoke. “I did not offer you a pipe as I assumed after your premature exit in the first round of the
competition you would not be smoking.” I smiled. “But Sir Alec,” he continued, “is a man with long
experience in politics and it’s no bad thing for a country to be governed by an experienced
gentleman.”
I would have laughed out loud had the same opinion been expressed by my own tutor.
“And what of the Labour leader?” I said, forebearing to mention his name.
“Moulded in the white heat of a technological revolution,” he replied.
“I am not so certain. I liked Gaitskell, an intelligent and shrewd man. An untimely death.
Attlee, like Sir Alec, was a gentleman. But as for Mr. Wilson, I suspect that history will test his
mettle – a pun which I had not intended – in that white heat and only then will we discover the truth.”
I could think of no reply.
“I was considering last night after we parted,” the old man continued, “the effect that Suez
must have had on a nation which only ten years before had won a world war. The Americans should
have backed you. Now we read in retrospect, always the historian’s privilege, that at the time Prime
Minister Eden was tired and ill. The truth was he didn’t get the support from his closest allies when
he most needed it.”
“Perhaps we should have supported you in 1956.”
“No, no, it was too late then for the West to shoulder Hungary’s problems.
Churchill understood that in 1945. He wanted to advance beyond Berlin and to free all the
nations that bordered Russia. But the West had had a belly full of war by then and left Stalin to take
advantage of that apathy. When Churchill coined the phrase ‘the Iron Curtain’, he foresaw exactly
what was going to happen in the East.
Amazing to think that when that great man said, ‘if the British Empire should last a thousand
years’, it was in fact destined to survive for only twenty-five. How I wish he had still been around the
corridors of power in 831956.”
“Did the revolution greatly affect your life?”
“I do not complain. It is a privilege to be the Professor of English in a great University. They
do not interfere with me in my department and Shakespeare is not yet considered subversive
literature.” He paused and took a luxuriant puff at his pipe. “And what will you do, young man, when
you leave the University – as you have shown us that you cannot hope to make a living as a runner?”
“I want to be a writer.”
“Then travel, travel, travel,” he said. “You cannot hope to learn everything from books. You
must see the world for yourself if you ever hope to paint a picture for others.”
I looked up at the old clock on his mantelpiece only to realise how quickly the time had
passed.
“I must leave you, I’m afraid; they expect us all to be back in the hotel by ten.”
“Of course,” he said smiling the English Public School mentality. “I will accompany you to
Kossuth Square and then you will be able to see your hotel on the hill.”
As we left the flat, I noticed that he didn’t bother to lock the door. Life had left him little to
lose. He led me quickly through the myriad of narrow roads that I had found so impossible to navigate
earlier in the evening, chatting about this building and that, an endless fund of knowledge about his
own country as well as mine. When we reached Kossuth Square he took my hand and held on to it,
reluctant to let go, as lonely people often will.
“Thank you for allowing an old man to indulge himself by chattering on about his favourite
subject.”
“Thank you for your hospitality,” I said, “and when you are next in Somerset you must come to
Lympsham and meet my family.”
“Lympsham? I cannot place it,” he said, looking worried.
“I’m not surprised. The village only has a population of twenty-two.”
“Enough for two cricket teams,”
remarked the professor. “A game, I confess, with which I have never come to grips.”
“Don’t worry,” I said, “neither have half the English.”
“Ah, but I should like to. What is a gully, a no-ball, a night watchman? The terms have always
intrigued me.”
“Then remember to get in touch when you’re next in England and I’ll take you to Lord’s and
see if I can teach you something.”
“How kind,” he said, and then he hesitated before adding: “But I don’t think we shall meet
again.”
“Why not?” I asked.
“Well, you see, I have never been outside Hungary in my whole life. When I was young I
couldn’t afford to and now I don’t imagine that those in authority would allow me to see your beloved
England.”
He released my hand, turned and shuffled back into the shadows of the side streets of
Budapest.
I read his obituary in The Times once again as well as the headlines about Afghanistan and its
effect on the Moscow Olympics.
He was right. We never met again.