
"You don't think he drove away then?" said the sheriff."He wouldn't leave me here like this."The sheriff nodded. "All right, go on," he said.When she was finished, the sheriff nodded again and they went inside. They went to thecounter."This lady's husband go in the lavatory, Jim?" the sheriff asked the man in the whiteducks."How should I know?" the man asked. "I was cooking. Ask Tom, he was in there." Henodded toward the man in the fedora."What about it, Tom?" asked the sheriff."Sheriff, didn't the lady tell you her husband just lit out before in their car?""That's not true!" Jean cried."You see the man driving the car away, Tom?" the sheriff asked."Sure I saw him. Why else would I say it?""No. No." Jean murmured the word with tiny, frightened shakes of her head."Why didn't you call after him if you saw him?" the sheriff asked Tom."Sheriff, ain't none of my business if a man wants to run out on-""He didn't run out!"The man in the fedora shrugged his shoulders with a grin. The sheriff turned to Jean."Did you see your husband go in the lavatory?""Yes, of course I-well, no, I didn't exactly see him go in, but-"She broke off into angry silence as the man in the fedora chuckled."I know he went in," she said, "because after I came out of the ladies washroom I wentoutside and the car was empty. Where else could he have been? The cafe is only so big.There's a door in that washroom. He said it hasn't been used in years." She pointed at the
man in the white ducks. "But I know it has. I know my husband didn't just leave mehere. He wouldn't do it. I know him, and he wouldn't do it!""Sheriff," said the man in white ducks, "I showed the washroom to her when she asked.There wasn't nobody in there and she can't say there was."Jean twisted her shoulders irritably."He went through that other door," she said."Lady, that door ain't used!" the man said loudly. Jean flinched and stepped back."All right, take it easy, Jim," the sheriff said. "Lady, if you didn't see your husband go inthat lavatory and you didn't see if it was somebody else drivin' your car away, I don't seewhat we got to go on.""What?"She couldn't believe what she'd heard. Was the man actually telling her there wasnothing to be done? For a second she tightened in fury thinking that the sheriff was juststicking up for his own townspeople against a stranger. Then the impact of being aloneand helpless struck her and her breath caught as she looked at the sheriff with childlike,frightened eyes."Lady, I don't see what I can do," the sheriff said with a shake of his head."Can't you-" She gestured timidly. "Can't you l-look in the washroom for a clue orsomething? Can't you open that door?"The sheriff looked at her for a moment, then pursed his lips and walked down to thewashroom. Jean followed him closely, afraid to stay near the two men.She looked into the washroom as the sheriff was testing the closed door. She shudderedas the man in the white ducks came down and stood beside her."I told her it don't open," he said to the sheriff."It's locked on the other side. How could the man get out?""Someone might have opened it on the other side," Jean said nervously.The man made a sound of disgust.
"Anyone else been around here?" the sheriff asked Jim."Just Sam McComas havin' some beer before, but he went home about-""I mean in this shed.""Sheriff, you know there ain't.""What about big Lou?" the sheriff asked.Jim was quiet a second and Jean saw his throat move."He ain't been around for months, Sheriff," Jim said. "He went up north.""Jim, you better go around and open up this door," the sheriff said."Sheriff, ain't nothin' but an empty shed in there.""I know, Jim, I know. Just want to satisfy the lady."Jean stood there feeling the looseness around her eyes again, the sick feeling of beingwithout help. It made her dizzy, as if everything were spinning away from her. She heldone fist with her other hand and all her fingers were white.Jim went out the screen door with a disgusted mutter and the door slapped shut behindhim."Lady, come here," Jean heard the sheriff say quickly and softly. Her heart jumped asshe moved into the washroom."You recognize this?"She looked at the shred of cloth in his palm, then she gasped, "That's the color slacks hehad on!""Ma'am, not so loud," the sheriff said. "I don't want them to think I know anything."He stepped out of the washroom suddenly as he heard boots on the floor. "You goin'somewhere, Tom?" he asked."No, no, Sheriff," said the man in the fedora. "Just comin' down to see how you wasgettin' on.""Uh-huh. Well-stick around for a while, will you, Tom?" said the sheriff.
"Sure, Sheriff, sure," Tom said broadly. "I ain't goin' nowhere."They heard a clicking sound in the washroom, and in a moment the door was pulledopen. The sheriff walked past Jean and down three steps into a dimly lit shed."Got a light in here?" he asked Jim."Nope, ain't got no reason to. No one ever uses it."The sheriff pulled a light string, but nothing happened."Don't you believe me, Sheriff?" Jim said."Sure I do, Jim," said the sheriff. "I'm just curious."Jean stood in the doorway looking down into the damp-smelling shed."Kinda beat up in here," said the sheriff, looking at a knocked-over table and chair."No one's been here for years, Sheriff," Jim said. "Ain't no reason to tidy it up.""Years, eh?" the sheriff said half to himself as he moved around the shed. Jean watchedhim, her hands numb at the fingertips, shaking. Why didn't he find out where Bob was?That shred of cloth-how did it get torn from Bob's slacks? She gritted her teeth hard. Imustn't cry, she ordered herself. I just mustn't cry. I know he's all right. He's perfectly allright.The sheriff stopped and bent over to pick up a newspaper. He glanced at it casually, thenfolded it and hit it against one palm casually."Years, eh?" he said."Well, I haven't been here in years," Jim said hurriedly, licking his lips. "Could be that-oh, Lou or somebody been holin' up in here sometime the last year. I don't keep theoutside door locked ya know.""Thought you said Lou went up north," the sheriff said mildly."He did, he did. I say in the last year he might have-""This is yesterday's paper, Jim," the sheriff said.
Jim looked blank, started to say something and then closed his mouth without making asound. Jean felt herself trembling without control now. She didn't hear the screen doorclose quietly in front of the cafe or the furtive footsteps across the porch boards."Well-I didn't say Lou was the only one who might have sneaked in here for a night,"Jim said quickly. "Could have been any tramp passing by."He stopped as the sheriff looked around suddenly, his gaze darting past Jean. "Where'sTom?" he asked loudly.Jean's head snapped around. Then she backed away with a gasp as the sheriff dashed upthe steps and ran by her."Stick around, Jim!" the sheriff called over his shoulder.Jean rushed out of the cafe after him. As she came out on the porch she saw the sheriffshading his eyes with one hand and looking up the road. Her eyes jumped in the samedirection, and she saw the man in the fedora running toward another man, a tall man."That'd be Lou," she heard the sheriff murmur to himself.He started running; then, after a few steps, he came back and jumped into his car."Sheriff!"He glanced out the window and saw the look of fright on her face. "All right, hurry up!Get in!"She jumped off the porch and ran toward the car. The sheriff pushed open the door andJean slid in beside him and pulled it shut. The sheriff gunned his car out past the cafeand it skidded onto the road in a cloud of dust."What is it?" Jean asked him breathlessly."Your husband didn't leave you," was all the sheriff said."Where is he?" she asked in a frightened voice.But they were already overtaking the two men who had met and were now running intothe brush.The sheriff jerked the car off the road and slammed on the brakes. He pushed out of thecar, quickly reaching down for his pistol.
"Tom!" he yelled. "Lou! Stop running!"The men kept going. The sheriff leveled his pistol barrel and fired. Jean started at theexplosion and saw, far out across the rocky desert, a spout of sand jump up near the men.They both stopped abruptly, turned and held up their hands."Come on back!" yelled the sheriff. "And make it fast!"Jean stood beside the car, unable to keep her hands from shaking. Her eyes werefastened on the two men walking toward them."All right, where is he?" the sheriff asked as they came up."Who you talkin' about, Sheriff?" asked the man in the fedora."Never mind that, Tom," the sheriff said angrily. "I'm not foolin' anymore. This ladywants her husband back. Now where-""Husband!" Lou looked at the man in the fedora with angry eyes. "I thought we decidedagin that!""Shut your mouth!" the man in the fedora said, his pleasant demeanor gone entirely now."You told me we wasn't gonna-" Lou started."Let's see what you got in your pockets, Lou," the sheriff said.Lou looked at the sheriff blankly. "My pockets?" he said."Come on, come on." The sheriff waved his pistol impatiently. Lou started emptying hispockets slowly."Told me we wasn't gonna do that," he muttered aside to the man in the fedora. "Toldme. Stupid jackass."Jean gasped as Lou tossed the wallet on the ground. "That's Bob's," she murmured."Get his things, lady," the sheriff said.Nervously she moved over at the feet of the men and picked up the wallet, the coins, thecar keys.
"All right, where is he?" the sheriff asked. "And don't waste my time!" he said angrily tothe man in the fedora."Sheriff, I don't know what you-" started the man.The sheriff almost lunged forward. "So help me!" he raged. Tom threw up one arm andstepped back."I'll tell you for a fact, Sheriff," Lou broke in. "If I'd known this fella had his womanwith him, I'd never've done it."Jean stared at the tall, ugly man, her teeth digging into her lower lip. Bob, Bob. Hermind kept saying his name."Where is he, I said," the sheriff demanded."I'll show you, I'll show you," Lou said. "I told you I never would've done it if I'd knownhis woman was with him."Again he turned to the man in the fedora. "Why'd you let him go in there?" hedemanded. "Why? Answer me that?""Don't know what he's talkin' about, Sheriff," Tom said blandly. "Why, I-""Get on the road," the sheriff ordered. "Both of you. You take us to him or you're reallyin trouble. I'm followin' you in the car. Don't make any wrong move, not one."The car moved slowly behind the two walking men."I been after these boys for a year," the sheriff told her. "They set themselves up a nicelittle system robbin' men who come to the cafe, then dumpin' them in the desert andsellin' their car up north."Jean hardly heard what he was saying. She kept staring at the road ahead, her stomachtight, her hands pressed tightly together."Never knew how they worked it though," the sheriff went on. "Never thought of thelavatory. Guess what they did was keep it locked for any man but one who was alone.They must've slipped up today. I guess Lou just jumped anyone who came in there. He'snot any too bright.""Do you think they-" Jean started hesitantly.
The sheriff hesitated. "I don't know, lady. I wouldn't think so. They ain't that dumb.Besides we had cases like this before and they never hurt no one worse than a bump onthe head."He honked the horn. "Come on, snap it up!" he called to the men."Are there snakes out there?" Jean asked.The sheriff didn't answer. He just pressed his mouth together and stepped on theaccelerator so the men had to break into a trot to keep ahead of the bumper.A few hundred yards further on, Lou turned off and started down a dirt road."Oh my God, where did they take him?" Jean asked."Should be right down here," the sheriff said.Then Lou pointed to a clump of trees and Jean saw their car. The sheriff stopped hiscoupe and they got out. "All right, where is he?" he asked.Lou started across the broken desert ground. Jean kept feeling the need to break into arun. She had to tense herself to keep walking by the sheriff's side. Their shoes crunchedover the dry desert soil. She hardly felt the pebbles through her sandals, so intently wasshe studying the ground ahead."Ma'am," Lou said, "I hope you won't be too hard on me. If I'd known you was withhim, I'd've never touched him.""Knock it off, Lou," the sheriff said. "You're both in up to your necks, so you might aswell save your breath."Then Jean saw the body lying out on the sand, and with a sob she ran past the men, herheart pounding."Bob-"She held his head in her lap, and when his eyes fluttered open, she felt as if the earth hadbeen taken off her back.He tried to smile, then winced at the pain. "I been hit," he muttered.Without a word, the tears came running down her cheeks. She helped him back to theircar, and as she followed the sheriff's car, she held tightly to Bob's hand all the way back
to town.