At dusk the big Englishman Belcher would shift his long legs out of
the ashes and ask, 'Well, chums, what about it?' and Noble or me
would say, 'As you please, chum' (for we had picked up some of
their curious expressions), and the little Englishman 'Awkins
would light the lamp and produce the cards. Sometimes Jeremiah
Donovan would come up of an evening and supervise the play, and
grow excited over 'Awkins's cards (which he always played badly),
and shout at him as if he was one of our own, 'Ach, you divil you,
why didn't you play the tray?' But, ordinarily, Jeremiah was a sober
and contented poor devil like the big Englishman Belcher, and was
looked up to at all only because he was a fair hand at documents,
though slow enough at these, I vow. He wore a small cloth hat and
big gaiters over his long pants and seldom did 1 perceive his hands
outside the pockets of that pants. He reddened when you talked to
him, tilting from toe to heel and back and looking down all the
while at his big farmer's feet. His uncommon broad accent was a
great source of jest to me, I being from the town as you may recognize.
I couldn't at the time see the point of me and Noble being with
Belcher and 'Awkins at all, for it was and is my fixed belief you
could have planted that pair in any untended spot from this to
Claregalway and they'd have stayed put and flourished like a native
weed. I never seen in my short experience two men that took to the
country as they did.
They were handed on to us by the Second Battalion to keep when
the search for them became too hot, and Noble and myself, being
young, took charge with a natural feeling of responsibility. But little
'Awkins made us look right fools when he displayed he knew the
countryside as well as we did and something more. 'You're the
bloke they calls Bonaparte?' he said to me. 'Well, Bonaparte, Mary
Brigid Ho'Connell was arskin abaout you and said 'ow you'd a 
372. Frank O'Connor
pair of socks belonging to 'er young brother.' For it seemed, as they
explained it, that the Second used to have little evenings of their
own, and some of the girls of the neighbourhood would turn in,
and, seeing they were such decent fellows, our lads couldn't well
ignore the two Englishmen, but invited them in and were hail-fellow-well-met with them. 'Awkins told me he learned to dance 'The
Walls of Limerick' and 'The Siege of Ennis' and 'The Waves of Tory'
in a night or two, though naturally he could not return the compliment, because our lads at that time did not dance foreign dances
on principle.
So whatever privileges and favours Belcher and 'Awkins had
with the Second they duly took with us, and after the first evening
we gave up all pretence of keeping a close eye on their behaviour.
Not that they could have got far, for they had a notable accent and
wore khaki tunics and overcoats with civilian pants and boots. But
it's my belief they never had an idea of escaping and were quite
contented with their lot.
Now, it was a treat to see how Belcher got off with the old
woman of the house we were staying in. She was a great warrant
to scold, and crotchety even with us, but before ever she had a
chance of giving our guests, as I may call them, a lick of her tongue,
Belcher had made her his friend for life. She was breaking sticks at
the time, and Belcher, who hadn't been in the house for more than
ten minutes, jumped up out of his seat and went across to her.
'Allow me, madam,' he says, smiling his queer little smile; 'please
allow me', and takes the hatchet from her hand. She was struck too
parlatic to speak, and ever after Belcher would be at her heels carrying a bucket, or basket, or load of turf, as the case might be. As
Noble wittily remarked, he got into looking before she leapt, and
hot water or any little thing she wanted Belcher would have it ready
before her. For such a huge man (and though I am five foot ten
myself I had to look up to him) he had an uncommon shortness -
or should I say lack - of speech. It took us some time to get used to
him walking in and out like a ghost, without a syllable out of him.
Especially because 'Awkins talked enough for a platoon, it was
strange to hear big Belcher with his toes in the ashes come out with
a solitary 'Excuse me, chum,' or 'That's right, chum.' His one and
only abiding passion was cards, and I will say for him he was a
good card-player. He could have fleeced me and Noble many a
time; only if we lost to him, 'Awkins lost to us, and 'Awkins played 
Guests of the Nation 3 7 3
with the money Belcher gave him.
'Awkins lost to us because he talked too much, and I think now
we lost to Belcher for the same reason. 'Awkins and Noble would
spit at one another about religion into the early hours of the morning; the little Englishman as you could see worrying the soul out of
young Noble (whose brother was a priest) with a string of questions that would puzzle a cardinal. And to make it worse, even in
treating of these holy subjects, 'Awkins had a deplorable tongue; I
never in all my career struck across a man who could mix such a
variety of cursing and bad language into the simplest topic. Oh, a
terrible man was little 'Awkins, and a fright to argue! He never did
a stroke of work, and when he had no one else to talk to he fixed
his claws into the old woman.
I am glad to say that in her he met his match, for one day when
he tried to get her to complain profanely of the drought she gave
him a great comedown by blaming the drought upon Jupiter Pluvius (a deity neither 'Awkins nor I had ever even heard of, though
Noble said among the pagans he was held to have something to do
with rain). And another day the same 'Awkins was swearing at the
capitalists for starting the German war, when the old dame laid
down her iron, puckered up her little crab's mouth and said, 'Mr
'Awkins, you can say what you please about the war, thinking to
deceive me because I'm an ignorant old woman, but I know well
what started the war. It was that Italian count that stole the heathen
divinity out of the temple in Japan, for believe me, Mr 'Awkins,
nothing but sorrow and want follows them that disturbs the hidden
powers!' Oh, a queer old dame, as you remark!
11
So one evening we had our tea together, and 'Awkins lit the lamp
and we all sat in to cards. Jeremiah Donovan came in too, and sat
down and watched us for a while. Though he was a shy man and
didn't speak much, it was easy to see he had no great love for the
two Englishmen, and I was surprised it hadn't struck me so clearly
before. Well, like that in the story, a terrible dispute blew up late in
the evening between 'Awkins and Noble, about capitalists and
priests and love for your own country.
'The capitalists,' says 'Awkins, with an angry gulp, 'the capitalists pays the priests to tell you all abaout the next world, so's you
waon't notice what they do in this!' 
374. Frank O'Connor
'Nonsense, man,' says Noble, losing his temper, 'before ever a
capitalist was thought of people believed in the next world.'
'Awkins stood up as if he was preaching a sermon. 'Oh, they did,
did they?' he says with a sneer. 'They believed all the things you
believe, that's what you mean? And you believe that God created
Hadam and Hadam created Shem and Shem created Jehoshophat?
You believe all the silly hold fairy-tale abaout Heve and Heden and
the happle? Well, listen to me, chum. If you're entitled to 'old to a
silly belief like that, I'm entitled to 'old to my own silly belief —
which is, that the fust thing your God created was a bleedin' capitalist with mirality and Rolls Royce complete. Am I right, chum?'
he says then to Belcher.
'You're right, chum,' says Belcher, with his queer smile, and gets
up from the table to stretch his long legs into the fire and stroke his
moustache. So, seeing that Jeremiah Donovan was going, and there
was no knowing when the conversation about religion would be
over, I took my hat and went out with him. We strolled down towards the village together, and then he suddenly stopped, and
blushing and mumbling, and shifting, as his way was, from toe to
heel, he said I ought to be behind keeping guard on the prisoners.
And I, having it put to me so suddenly, asked him what the hell
he wanted a guard on the prisoners at all for, and said that so far
as Noble and me were concerned we had talked it over and
would rather be out with a column. 'What use is that pair to us?' I
asked him.
He looked at me for a spell and said, 'I thought you knew we
were keeping them as hostages.' 'Hostages — ?' says I, not quite
understanding. 'The enemy', he says in his heavy way, 'have prisoners belong to us, and now they talk of shooting them. If they
shoot our prisoners we'll shoot theirs, and serve them right.' 'Shoot
them?' said I, the possibility just beginning to dawn on me. 'Shoot
them, exactly,' said he. 'Now,' said I, 'wasn't it very unforeseen of
you not to tell me and Noble that?' 'How so?' he asks. 'Seeing that
we were acting as guards upon them, of course.' 'And hadn't you
reason enough to guess that much?' 'We had not, Jeremiah Donovan, we had not. How were we to know when the men were on our
hands so long?' 'And what difference does it make? The enemy
have our prisoners as long or longer, haven't they?' 'It makes a
great difference,' said I. 'How so?' said he sharply; but I couldn't
tell him the difference it made, for I was struck too silly to speak. 
Guests of the Nation 375
'And when may we expect to be released from this anyway?' said
I. 'You may expect it tonight,' says he. 'Or tomorrow or the next
day at latest. So if it's hanging round here that worries you, you'll
be free soon enough.'
I cannot explain it even now, how sad I felt, but I went back to
the cottage, a miserable man. When I arrived the discussion was
still on, 'Awkins holding forth to all and sundry that there was no
next world at all and Noble answering in his best canonical style
that there was. But I saw 'Awkins was after having the best of it.
'Do you know what, chum?' he was saying, with his saucy smile,
'I think you're jest as big a bleedin' hunbeliever as I am. You say
you believe in the next world and you know jest as much abaout
the next world as I do, which is sweet damn-all. What's 'Eaven?
You dunno. Where's 'Eaven? You dunno. Who's in 'Eaven? You
dunno. You know sweet damn-all! I arsk you again, do they wear
wings?'
'Very well then,' says Noble, 'they do; is that enough for you?
They do wear wings.' 'Where do they get them then? Who makes
them? 'Ave they a fact'ry for wings? 'Ave they a sort of store where
you 'ands in your chit and tikes your bleedin' wings? Answer me
that.'
'Oh, you're an impossible man to argue with,' says Noble. 'Now
listen to me — '. And off the pair of them went again.
It was long after midnight when we locked up the Englishmen
and went to bed ourselves. As I blew out the candle I told Noble
what Jeremiah Donovan had told me. Noble took it very quietly.
After we had been in bed about an hour he asked me did I think
we ought to tell the Englishmen. I having thought of the same thing
myself (among many others) said no, because it was more than
likely the English wouldn't shoot our men, and anyhow it wasn't
to be supposed the Brigade who were always up and down with
the second battalion and knew the Englishmen well would be likely
to want them bumped off. 'I think so,' says Noble. 'It would be sort
of cruelty to put the wind up them now.' 'It was very unforeseen of
Jeremiah Donovan anyhow,' says I, and by Noble's silence I realized
he took my meaning.
So I lay there half the night, and thought and thought, and picturing myself and young Noble trying to prevent the Brigade from
shooting 'Awkins and Belcher sent a cold sweat out through me.
Because there were men on the Brigade you daren't let nor hinder 
376. Frank O'Connor
without a gun in your hand, and at any rate, in those days disunion
between brothers seemed to me an awful crime. I knew better after.
It was next morning we found it so hard to face Belcher and
'Awkins with a smile. We went about the house all day scarcely
saying a word. Belcher didn't mind us much; he was stretched into
the ashes as usual with his usual look of waiting in quietness for
something unforeseen to happen, but little 'Awkins gave us a bad
time with his audacious gibing and questioning. He was disgusted
at Noble's not answering him back. 'Why can't you tike your beating like a man, chum?' he says. 'You with your Hadam and Heve!
I'm a Communist — or an Anarchist. An Anarchist, that's what I
am.' And for hours after he went round the house, mumbling when
the fit took him, 'Hadam and Heve! Hadam and Heve!'
HI
I don't know clearly how we got over that day, but get over it we
did, and a great relief it was when the tea-things were cleared away
and Belcher said in his peaceable manner, 'Well, chums, what about
it?' So we all sat round the table and 'Awkins produced the cards,
and at that moment I heard Jeremiah Donovan's footsteps up the
path, and a dark presentiment crossed my mind. I rose quietly from
the table and laid my hand on him before he reached the door.
'What do you want?' I asked him. 'I want those two soldier friends
of yours,' he says reddening. 'Is that the way it is, Jeremiah Donovan?' I ask. 'That's the way. There were four of our lads went west
this morning, one of them a boy of sixteen.' 'That's bad, Jeremiah,'
says I.
At that moment Noble came out, and we walked down the path
together talking in whispers. Feeney, the local intelligence officer,
was standing by the gate. 'What are you going to do about it?' I
asked Jeremiah Donovan. 'I want you and Noble to bring them
out: you can tell them they're being shifted again; that'll be the
quietest way.' 'Leave me out of that,' says Noble suddenly. Jeremiah
Donovan looked at him hard for a minute or two. 'All right so,' he
said peaceably. 'You and Feeney collect a few tools from the shed
and dig a hole by the far end of the bog. Bonaparte and I'll be after
you in about twenty minutes. But whatever else you do, don't let
anyone see you with the tools. No one must know but the four of
ourselves.'
We saw Feeney and Noble go round to the houseen where the 
Guests of the Nation 3 7 7
tools were kept, and sidled in. Everything if I can so express myself
was tottering before my eyes, and I left Jeremiah Donovan to do
the explaining as best he could, while I took a seat and said nothing. He told them they were to go back to the Second. 'Awkins let
a mouthful of curses out of him at that, and it was plain that
Belcher, though he said nothing, was duly perturbed. The old
woman was for having them stay in spite of us, and she did not
shut her mouth until Jeremiah Donovan lost his temper and said
some nasty things to her. Within the house by this time it was pitch
dark, but no one thought of lighting the lamp, and in the darkness
the two Englishmen fetched their khaki topcoats and said good-bye
to the woman of the house. 'Just as a man mikes a 'ome of a
bleedin' place,' mumbles 'Awkins shaking her by the hand, 'some
bastard at headquarters thinks you're too cushy and shunts you
off.' Belcher shakes her hand very hearty. 'A thousand thanks,
madam,' he says, 'a thousand thanks for everything . . . ' as though
he'd made it all up.
We go round to the back of the house and down towards the
fatal bog. Then Jeremiah Donovan comes out with what is in his
mind. 'There were four of our lads shot by your fellows this morning so now you're to be bumped off.' 'Cut that stuff out,' says
'Awkins flaring up. 'It's bad enough to be mucked about such as
we are without you plying at soldiers.' it's true,' says Jeremiah
Donovan, 'I'm sorry, 'Awkins, but 'tis true,' and comes out with
the usual rigmarole about doing our duty and obeying our superiors. 'Cut it out,' says 'Awkins irritably, 'Cut it out!'
Then, when Donovan sees he is not being believed he turns to
me. 'Ask Bonaparte here,' he says. 'I don't need to arsk Bonaparte.
Me and Bonaparte are chums.' isn't it true, Bonaparte?' says Jeremiah Donovan solemnly to me. it is,' I say sadly, 'it is.' 'Awkins
stops. 'Now, for Christ's sike. . . .' 'I mean it, chum,' I say. 'You
daon't saound as if you mean it. You knaow well you don't mean
it.' 'Well, if he don't I do,' says Jeremiah Donovan. 'Why the 'ell
sh'd you want to shoot me, Jeremiah Donovan?' 'Why the hell
should your people take out four prisoners and shoot them in cold
blood upon a barrack square?' I perceive Jeremiah Donovan is
trying to encourage himself with hot words.
Anyway, he took little 'Awkins by the arm and dragged him on,
but it was impossible to make him understand that we were in
earnest. From which you will perceive how difficult it was for me, 
378. Frank O'Connor
as I kept feeling my Smith and Wesson and thinking what I would
do if they happened to put up a fight or ran for it, and wishing in
my heart they would. I knew if only they ran I would never fire on
them. 'Was Noble in this?' 'Awkins wanted to know, and we said
yes. He laughed. But why should Noble want to shoot him? Why
should we want to shoot him? What had he done to us? Weren't
we chums (the word lingers painfully in my memory)? Weren't we?
Didn't we understand him and didn't he understand us? Did either
of us imagine for an instant that he'd shoot us for all the so-and-so
brigadiers in the so-and-so British Army? By this time I began to
perceive in the dusk the desolate edges of the bog that was to be
their last earthly bed, and, so great a sadness overtook my mind, I
could not answer him. We walked along the edge of it in the darkness, and every now and then 'Awkins would call a halt and begin
again, just as if he was wound up, about us being chums, and I was
in despair that nothing but the cold and open grave made ready for
his presence would convince him that we meant it all. But all the
same, if you can understand, I didn't want him to be bumped off.
IV
At last we saw the unsteady glint of a lantern in the distance and
made towards it. Noble was carrying it, and Feeney stood somewhere in the darkness behind, and somehow the picture of the two
of them so silent in the boglands was like the pain of death in my
heart. Belcher, on recognizing Noble, said "Alio, chum' in his
usual peaceable way, but 'Awkins flew at the poor boy immediately,
and the dispute began all over again, only that Noble hadn't a word
to say for himself, and stood there with the swaying lantern between his gaitered legs.
It was Jeremiah Donovan who did the answering. 'Awkins asked
for the twentieth time (for it seemed to haunt his mind) if anybody
thought he'd shoot Noble. 'You would,' says Jeremiah Donovan
shortly. 'I wouldn't, damn you!' 'You would if you knew you'd be
shot for not doing it.' 'I wouldn't, not if I was to be shot twenty
times over; he's my chum. And Belcher wouldn't - isn't that right,
Belcher?' 'That's right, chum,' says Belcher peaceably. 'Damned if
I would. Anyway, who says Noble'd be shot if I wasn't bumped
off? What d'you think I'd do if I was in Noble's place and we were
out in the middle of a blasted bog?' 'What would you do?' 'I'd go
with him wherever he was going. I'd share my last bob with him 
Guests of the Nation 379
and stick by 'im through thick and thin.'
'We've had enough of this,' says Jeremiah Donovan, cocking his
revolver. 'Is there any message you want to send before I fire?' 'No,
there isn't, but . . . ' 'Do you want to say your prayers?' 'Awkins
came out with a cold-blooded remark that shocked even me and
turned to Noble again. 'Listen to me, Noble,' he said. 'You and me
are chums. You won't come over to my side, so I'll come over to
your side. Is that fair? Just you give me a rifle and I'll go with you
wherever you want.'
Nobody answered him.
'Do you understand?' he said. 'I'm through with it all. I'm a deserter or anything else you like, but from this on I'm one of you.
Does that prove to you that I mean what I say?' Noble raised his
head, but as Donovan began to speak he lowered it again without
answering. 'For the last time have you any messages to send?' says
Donovan in a cold and excited voice.
'Ah, shut up, you, Donovan; you don't understand me, but these
fellows do. They're my chums; they stand by me and I stand by
them. We're not the capitalist tools you seem to think us.'
I alone of the crowd saw Donovan raise his Webley to the back
of 'Awkins's neck, and as he did so I shut my eyes and tried to say
a prayer. 'Awkins had begun to say something else when Donovan
let fly, and, as I opened my eyes at the bang, I saw him stagger at
the knees and lie out flat at Noble's feet, slowly, and as quiet as a
child, with the lantern-light falling sadly upon his lean legs and
bright farmer's boots. We all stood very still for a while watching
him settle out in the last agony.
Then Belcher quietly takes out a handkerchief, and begins to tie
it about his own eyes (for in our excitement we had forgotten to
offer the same to 'Awkins), and, seeing it is not big enough, turns
and asks for a loan of mine. I give it to him and as he knots the two
together he points with his foot at 'Awkins. ' 'E's not quite dead,'
he says, 'better give 'im another.' Sure enough 'Awkins's left knee
as we see it under the lantern is rising again. 1 bend down and put
my gun to his ear; then, recollecting myself and the company of
Belcher, I stand up again with a few hasty words. Belcher understands what is in my mind. 'Give 'im 'is first,' he says, i don't mind.
Poor bastard, we dunno what's 'appening to 'im now.' As by this
time I am beyond all feeling I kneel down again and skilfully give
'Awkins the last shot so as to put him for ever out of pain. 
380. Frank O'Connor
Belcher who is fumbling a bit awkwardly with the handkerchiefs
comes out with a laugh when he hears the shot. It is the first time
I have heard him laugh, and it sends a shiver down my spine, coming as it does so inappropriately upon the tragic death of his old
friend. 'Poor blighter,' he says quietly, 'and last night he was so
curious abaout it all. It's very queer, chums, I always think. Naow,
'e knows as much abaout it as they'll ever let 'im know, and last
night 'e was all in the dark.'
Donovan helps him to tie the handkerchiefs about his eyes.
'Thanks, chum,' he says. Donovan asks him if there are any messages he would like to send. 'Naow, chum,' he says, 'none for me.
If any of you likes to write to 'Awkins's mother you'll find a letter
from 'er in 'is pocket. But my missus left me eight years ago. Went
away with another fellow and took the kid with her. I likes the
feelin' of a 'ome (as you may 'ave noticed) but I couldn't start again
after that.'
We stand around like fools now that he can no longer see us.
Donovan looks at Noble and Noble shakes his head. Then Donovan raises his Webley again and just at that moment Belcher laughs
his queer nervous laugh again. He must think we are talking of
him; anyway, Donovan lowers his gun. ' 'Scuse me, chums,' says
Belcher, 'I feel I'm talking the 'ell of a lot. . . and so silly . . . abaout
me being so 'andy abaout a 'ouse. But this thing come on me so
sudden. You'll forgive me, I'm sure.' 'You don't want to say a
prayer?' asks Jeremiah Donovan. 'No, chum,' he replies, 'I don't
think that'd 'elp. I'm ready if you want to get it over.' 'You understand,' says Jeremiah Donovan, 'it's not so much our doing. It's our
duty, so to speak.' Belcher's head is raised like a real blind man's,
so that you can only see his nose and chin in the lamplight. 'I never
could make out what duty was myself,' he said, 'but I think you're
all good lads, if that's what you mean. I'm not complaining.' Noble,
with a look of desperation, signals to Donovan, and in a flash Donovan raises his gun and fires. The big man goes over like a sack of
meal, and this time there is no need of a second shot.
I don't remember much about the burying, but that it was worse
than all the rest, because we had to carry the warm corpses a few
yards before we sunk them in the windy bog. It was all mad lonely,
with only a bit of lantern between ourselves and the pitch-blackness, and birds hooting and screeching all round disturbed by the
guns. Noble had to search 'Awkins first to get the letter from his 
Guests of the Nation 381
mother. Then having smoothed all signs of the grave away, Noble
and I collected our tools, said good-bye to the others, and went
back along the desolate edge of the treacherous bog without a
word. We put the tools in the houseen and went into the house.
The kitchen was pitch-black and cold, just as we left it, and the old
woman was sitting over the hearth telling her beads. We walked
past her into the room, and Noble struck a match to light the lamp.
Just then she rose quietly and came to the doorway, being not at all
so bold or crabbed as usual.
'What did ye do with them?' she says in a sort of whisper, and
Noble took such a mortal start the match quenched in his trembling hand. 'What's that?' he asks without turning round. 'I heard
ye,' she said. 'What did you hear?' asks Noble, but sure he wouldn't
deceive a child the way he said it. 'I heard ye. Do you think I wasn't
listening to ye putting the things back in the houseen?' Noble
struck another match and this time the lamp lit for him. 'Was that
what ye did with them?' she said, and Noble said nothing - after
all what could he say?
So then, by God, she fell on her two knees by the door, and began
telling her beads, and after a minute or two Noble went on his
knees by the fireplace, so I pushed my way out past her, and stood
at the door, watching the stars and listening to the damned shrieking of the birds. It is so strange what you feel at such moments, and
not to be written afterwards. Noble says he felt he seen everything
ten times as big, perceiving nothing around him but the little patch
of black bog with the two Englishmen stiffening into it; but with
me it was the other way, as though the patch of bog where the two
Englishmen were was a thousand miles away from me, and even
Noble mumbling just behind me and the old woman and the birds
and the bloody stars were all far away, and I was somehow very
small and very lonely. And anything that ever happened me after I
never felt the same about again. 