Fedora had determined upon driving over to the station
herself for Miss Malthers.
Though one or two of them looked disappointed—notably
her brother—no one opposed her. She said the brute was
restive, and shouldn’t be trusted to the handling of the young
people.
To be sure Fedora was old enough, from the standpoint of
her sister Camilla and the rest of them. Yet no one would ever
have thought of it but for her own persistent affectation and
idiotic assumption of superior years and wisdom. She was
thirty.
Fedora had too early in life formed an ideal and treasured
it. By this ideal she had measured such male beings as had
hitherto challenged her attention, and needless to say she had
found them wanting. The young people—her brothers’ and
sisters’ guests, who were constantly coming and going that
summer—occupied her to a great extent, but failed to interest her. She concerned herself with their comforts—in the
absence of her mother—looked after their health and
well-being; contrived for their amusements, in which she
never joined. And, as Fedora was tall and slim, and carried her
head loftily, and wore eye-glasses and a severe expression,
some of them—the silliest—felt as if she were a hundred years
old. Young Malthers thought she was about forty.
One day when he stopped before her out in the gravel walk
to ask her some question pertaining to the afternoon’s sport,
Fedora, who was tall, had to look up into his face to answer
him. She had known him eight years, since he was a lad of fifteen, and to her he had never been other than the lad of fifteen.
But that afternoon, looking up into his face, the sudden realization came home to her that he was a man—in voice, in
attitude, in bearing, in every sense—a man.
In an absorbing glance, and with unaccountable intention,
she gathered in every detail of his countenance as though
it were a strange, new thing to her, presenting itself to her
vision for the first time. The eyes were blue, earnest, and at
the moment a little troubled over some trivial affair that he
was relating to her. The face was brown from the sun,
smooth, with no suggestion of ruddiness, except in the lips,
that were strong, firm and clean. She kept thinking of his face,
and every trick of it after he passed on.
From that moment he began to exist for her. She looked at
him when he was near by, she listened for his voice, and took
notice and account of what he said. She sought him out; she selected him when occasion permitted. She wanted him by her,
though his nearness troubled her. There was uneasiness, restlessness, expectation when he was not there within sight or
sound. There was redoubled uneasiness when he was by—
there was inward revolt, astonishment, rapture, self-contumely;
a swift, fierce encounter betwixt thought and feeling.
Fedora could hardly explain to her own satisfaction why she
wanted to go herself to the station for young Malthers’ sister.
She felt a desire to see the girl, to be near her; as unaccountable, when she tried to analyze it, as the impulse which drove
her, and to which she often yielded, to touch his hat, hanging
with others upon the hall pegs, when she passed it by. Once a
coat which he had discarded hung there too. She handled it
under pretense of putting it in order. There was no one near,
and, obeying a sudden impulse, she buried her face for an instant in the rough folds of the coat.
Fedora reached the station a little before train time. It was
in a pretty nook, green and fragrant, set down at the foot of
a wooded hill. Off in a clearing there was a field of yellow
grain, upon which the sinking sunlight fell in slanting, broken
beams. Far down the track there were some men at work, and
the even ring of their hammers was the only sound that broke
upon the stillness. Fedora loved it all—sky and woods and
sunlight; sounds and smells. But her bearing—elegant, composed, reserved—betrayed nothing emotional as she tramped
the narrow platform, whip in hand, and occasionally offered a
condescending word to the mail man or the sleepy agent.
Malthers’ sister was the only soul to disembark from the
train. Fedora had never seen her before; but if there had been
a hundred, she would have known the girl. She was a small
thing; but aside from that, there was the coloring; there were
the blue, earnest eyes; there, above all, was the firm, full curve
of the lips; the same setting of the white, even teeth. There
was the subtle play of feature, the elusive trick of expression,
which she had thought peculiar and individual in the one,
presenting themselves as family traits.
The suggestive resemblance of the girl to her brother was
vivid, poignant even to Fedora, realizing, as she did with a
pang, that familiarity and custom would soon blur the image.
Miss Malthers was a quiet, reserved creature, with little to
say. She had been to college with Camilla, and spoke somewhat of their friendship and former intimacy. She sat lower in
the cart than Fedora, who drove, handling whip and rein with
accomplished skill.
“You know, dear child,” said Fedora, in her usual elderly
fashion, “I want you to feel completely at home with us.”
They were driving through a long, quiet, leafy road, into
which the twilight was just beginning to creep. “Come to me
freely and without reserve—with all your wants; with any
complaints. I feel that I shall be quite fond of you.”
She had gathered the reins into one hand, and with the
other free arm she encircled Miss Malthers’ shoulders.
When the girl looked up into her face, with murmured
thanks, Fedora bent down and pressed a long, penetrating
kiss upon her mouth.
Malthers’ sister appeared astonished, and not too well
pleased. Fedora, with seemingly unruffled composure, gathered the reins, and for the rest of the way stared steadily
ahead of her between the horses’ ears.