THE COURTHOUSE CLOCK CHIMED SEVEN
TIMES. The echoes of the chimes faded.
Warm summer twilight here in upper
Illinois country in this little town deep far away
from everything, kept to itself by a river and a
forest and a meadow and a lake. The sidewalks
still scorched. The stores closing and the streets
shadowed. And there were two moons; the clock
moon with four faces in four night directions
above the solemn black courthouse, and the real
moon rising in vanilla whiteness from the dark
east.
In the drugstore fans whispered in the
high ceiling. In the rococo shade of porches, a few
invisible people sat. Cigars glowed pink, on
occasion. Screen doors whined their springs and
slammed. On the purple bricks of the summer-night
streets, Douglas Spaulding ran; dogs and boys
followed after.
“Hi, Miss Lavinia!”
The boys loped away. Waving after them
quietly, Lavinia Nebbs sat all alone with a tall cool
lemonade in her white fingers, tapping it to her
lips, sipping, waiting.
“Here I am, Lavinia.”
She turned and there was Francine, all
in snow white, at the bottom steps of the porch,
in the smell of zinnias and hibiscus.
Lavinia Nebbs locked her front door and,
leaving her lemonade glass half empty on the
porch, said, “It’s a fine night for the movie.”
They walked down the street.
“Where you going, girls?” cried Miss Fern
and Miss Roberta from their porch over the way.
Lavinia called back through the soft ocean
of darkness: “To the Elite Theater to see CHARLIE
CHAPLIN!”
“Won’t catch us out on no night like this,”
wailed Miss Fern. “Not with the Lonely One
strangling women. Lock ourselves up in our closet
with a gun.”
“Oh, bosh!” Lavinia heard the old women’s
door bang and lock, and she drifted on, feeling the
warm breath of summer night shimmering off the
oven-baked sidewalks. It was like walking on a
hard crust of freshly warmed bread. The heat
pulsed under your dress, along your legs, with a
stealthy and not unpleasant sense of invasion.
“Lavinia, you don’t believe all that about the
Lonely One, do you?” “Those women like to see their
tongues dance.”
“Just the same, Hattie McDollis was killed
two months ago, Roberta Ferry the month before,
and now Elizabeth Ramsell’s disappeared. . . .”
“Hattie McDollis was a silly girl, walked
off with a traveling man, I bet.”
“But the others, all of them, strangled, their
tongues sticking out their mouths, they say.”
They stood upon the edge of the ravine
that cut the town half in two. Behind them were the
lit houses and music, ahead was deepness,
moistness, fireflies and dark.
“Maybe we shouldn’t go to the show
tonight,” said Francine. “The Lonely One might
follow and kill us. I don’t like that ravine. Look at it,
will you!”
Lavinia looked and the ravine was a
dynamo that never stopped running, night or day;
there was a great moving hum, a bumbling and
murmuring of creature, insect, or plant life. It
smelled like a greenhouse, of secret vapors and
ancient, washed shales and quicksands. And
always the black dynamo humming, with sparkles
like great electricity where fireflies moved on the air.
“It won’t be me coming back through this
old ravine tonight late, so darned late; it’ll be you,
Lavinia, you down the steps and over the bridge
and maybe the Lonely One there.” “Bosh!” said
Lavinia Nebbs.
“It’ll be you alone on the path, listening to
your shoes, not me. You all alone on the way back
to your house. Lavinia, don’t you get lonely living in
that house?”
“Old maids love to live alone.” Lavinia
pointed at the hot shadowy path leading down into
the dark. “Let’s take the short cut.” “I’m afraid!”
“It’s early. Lonely One won’t be out till
late.” Lavinia took the other’s arm and led her down
and down the crooked path into the cricket warmth
and frog sound and mosquito-delicate silence.
They brushed through summer-scorched grass,
burs prickling at their bare ankles.
“Let’s run!” gasped Francine.
“No!”
They turned a curve in the path—and
there it was.
In the singing deep night, in the shade of
warm trees, as if she had laid herself out to enjoy 
the soft stars and the easy wind, her hands at
either side of her like the oars of a delicate craft, lay
Elizabeth Ramsell!
Francine screamed.
“Don’t scream!” Lavinia put out her hands
to hold onto Francine, who was whimpering and
choking. “Don’t! Don’t!”
The woman lay as if she had floated there,
her face moonlit, her eyes wide and like flint, her
tongue sticking from her mouth.
“She’s dead!” said Francine. “Oh, she’s
dead, dead! She’s dead!”
Lavinia stood in the middle of a thousand
warm shadows with the crickets screaming and the
frogs loud.
“We’d better get the police,” she said at last.
“Hold me, Lavinia, hold me, I’m cold, oh,
I’ve never been so cold in all my life!”
Lavinia held Francine and the policemen
were brushing through the crackling grass,
flashlights ducked about, voices mingled, and the
night grew toward eight-thirty.
“It’s like December. I need a sweater,” said
Francine, eyes shut, against Lavinia.
The policeman said, “I guess you can go
now, ladies. You might drop by the station tomorrow
for a little more questioning.”
Lavinia and Francine walked away from the
police and the sheet over the delicate thing upon
the ravine grass.
Lavinia felt her heart going loudly in her
and she was cold, too, with a February cold; there
were bits of sudden snow all over her flesh, and the
moon washed her brittle fingers whiter, and she
remembered doing all the talking while Francine
just sobbed against her.
A voice called from far off, “You want an
escort, ladies?”
“No, we’ll make it,” said Lavinia to nobody,
and they walked on. They walked through the
nuzzling, whispering ravine, the ravine of
whispers and clicks, the little world of
investigation growing small behind them with its
lights and voices.
“I’ve never seen a dead person before,”
said Francine. Lavinia examined her watch as if
it was a thousand miles away on an arm and
wrist grown impossibly distant. “It’s only eightthirty. We’ll pick up Helen and get on to the
show.” “The show!” Francine jerked.
“It’s what we need. We’ve got to forget
this. It’s not good to remember. If we went home
now we’d remember. We’ll go to the show as if
nothing happened.”
“Lavinia, you don’t mean it!”
“I never meant anything more in my life.
We need to laugh now and forget.”
“But Elizabeth’s back there—your friend,
my friend—” “We can’t help her; we can only help
ourselves. Come on.” They started up the ravine
side, on the stony path, in the dark. And suddenly
there, barring their way, standing very still in
one spot, not seeing them, but looking on down
at the moving lights and the body and listening to
the official voices, was Douglas Spaulding.
He stood there, white as a mushroom,
with his hands at his sides, staring down into the
ravine.
“Get home!” cried Francine. He did not
hear.
“You!” shrieked Francine. “Get home, get
out of this place, you hear? Get home, get home,
get home!”
Douglas jerked his head, stared at them
as if they were not there. His mouth moved. He
gave a bleating sound. Then, silently, he whirled
about and ran. He ran silently up the distant hills
into the warm darkness.
Francine sobbed and cried again and,
doing this, walked on with Lavinia Nebbs.
“There you are! I thought you ladies’d
never come!” Helen Greer stood tapping her foot
atop her porch steps. “You’re only an hour late,
that’s all. What happened?”
“We—” started Francine.
Lavinia clutched her arm tight. “There
was a commotion. Somebody found Elizabeth
Ramsell in the ravine.”
“Dead? Was she—dead?”
Lavinia nodded. Helen gasped and put
her hand to her throat. “Who found her?”
Lavinia held Francine’s wrist firmly. “We
don’t know.” The three young women stood in the
summer night looking at each other. “I’ve got a
notion to go in the house and lock the doors,” said
Helen at last.
But finally she went to get a sweater, for
though it was still warm, she, too, complained of
the sudden winter night. While she was gone
Francine whispered frantically, “Why didn’t you
tell her?”
“Why upset her?” said Lavinia. “Tomorrow.
Tomorrow’s plenty of time.”
The three women moved along the street
under the black trees, past suddenly locked
houses. How soon the news had spread outward
from the ravine, from house to house, porch to
porch, telephone to telephone. Now, passing, the
three women felt eyes looking out at them from
curtained windows as locks rattled into place.
How strange the popsicle, the vanilla night, the
night of close-packed ice cream, of mosquitolotioned wrists, the night of running children
suddenly veered from their games and put away
behind glass, behind wood, the popsicles in
melting puddles of lime and strawberry where
they fell when the children were scooped
indoors. Strange the hot rooms with the
sweating people pressed tightly back into them
behind the bronze knobs and knockers. Baseball
bats and balls lay upon the unfootprinted lawns.
A half-drawn, white-chalk game of hopscotch lay
on the broiled, steamed sidewalk. It was as if
someone had predicted freezing weather a
moment ago.
“We’re crazy being out on a night like
this,” said Helen.
“Lonely One won’t kill three ladies,” said
Lavinia. “There’s safety in numbers. And
besides, it’s too soon. The killings always come a
month separated.”
A shadow fell across their terrified faces. A
figure loomed behind a tree. As if someone had
struck an organ a terrible blow with his fist, the
three women gave off a scream, in three
different shrill notes.
“Got you!” roared a voice. The man
plunged at them. He came into the light, laughing.
He leaned against a tree, pointing at the ladies
weakly, laughing again.
“Hey! I’m the Lonely One!” said Frank
Dillon.
“Frank Dillon!”
“Frank!”
“Frank,” said Lavinia, “if you ever do a
childish thing like that again, may someone riddle
you with bullets!”
“What a thing to do!”
Francine began to cry hysterically.
Frank Dillon stopped smiling. “Say, I’m
sorry.”
“Go away!” said Lavinia. “Haven’t you heard
about Elizabeth Ramsell— found dead in the ravine?
You running around scaring women! Don’t speak to
us again!”
“Aw, now—”
They moved. He moved to follow.
“Stay right there, Mr. Lonely One, and scare
yourself. Go take a look at Elizabeth Ramsell’s face
and see if it’s funny. Good night!” Lavinia took the
other two on along the street of trees and stars,
Francine holding a kerchief to her face.
“Francine, it was only a joke.” Helen turned
to Lavinia. “Why’s she crying so hard?”
“We’ll tell you when we get downtown. We’re
going to the show no matter what! Enough’s enough.
Come on now, get your money ready, we’re almost
there!”
The drugstore was a small pool of sluggish
air which the great wooden fans stirred in tides of
arnica and tonic and soda-smell out onto the brick
streets.
“I need a nickel’s worth of green
peppermint chews,” said Lavinia to the druggist.
His face was set and pale, like all the faces they
had seen on the half-empty streets. “For eating in
the show,” said Lavinia as the druggist weighed out
a nickel’s worth of the green candy with a silver
shovel.
“You sure look pretty tonight, ladies. You
looked cool this afternoon, Miss Lavinia, when you
was in for a chocolate soda. So cool and nice that
someone asked after you.”
“Oh?”
“Man sitting at the counter—watched you
walk out. Said to me, ‘Say, who’s that?’ Why, that’s
Lavinia Nebbs, prettiest maiden lady in town, I
said. ‘She’s beautiful,’ he said. ‘Where does she
live?’ ” Here the druggist paused uncomfortably.
“You didn’t!” said Francine. “You didn’t give
him her address, I hope? You didn’t!”
“I guess I didn’t think. I said, ‘Oh, over on
Park Street, you know, near the ravine.” A casual
remark. But now, tonight, them finding the body, I
heard a minute ago, I thought, My God, what’ve I
done!” He handed over the package, much too full.
“You fool!” cried Francine, and tears were in
her eyes. “I’m sorry. Course, maybe it was nothing.”
Lavinia stood with the three people looking
at her, staring at her. She felt nothing. Except,
perhaps, the slightest prickle of excitement in her
throat. She held out her money automatically.
“There’s no charge on those peppermints,”
said the druggist, turning to shuffle some papers.
“Well, I know what I’m going to do right
now!” Helen stalked out of the drugshop. “I’m calling
a taxi to take us all home. I’ll be no part of a hunting
party for you, Lavinia. That man was up to no good.
Asking about you. You want to be dead in the
ravine next?”
“It was just a man,” said Lavinia, turning in
a slow circle to look at the town.
“So is Frank Dillon a man, but maybe he’s
the Lonely One.”
Francine hadn’t come out with them, they
noticed, and turning, they found her arriving. “I
made him give me a description—the druggist. I
made him tell what the man looked like. A
stranger,” she said, “in a dark suit. Sort of pale and
thin.”
“We’re all overwrought,” said Lavinia. “I
simply won’t take a taxi if you get one. If I’m the
next victim, let me be the next. There’s all too little
excitement in life, especially for a maiden lady
thirty-three years old, so don’t you mind if I enjoy
it. Anyway it’s silly; I’m not beautiful.”
“Oh, but you are, Lavinia; you’re the
loveliest lady in town, now that Elizabeth is—”
Francine stopped. “You keep men off at a distance.
If you’d only relax, you’d been married years ago!”
“Stop sniveling, Francine! Here’s the
theater box office, I’m paying forty-one cents to see
Charlie Chaplin. If you two want a taxi, go on. I’ll sit
alone and go home alone.”
“Lavinia, you’re crazy; we can’t let you do
that—”
They entered the theater.
The first showing was over, intermission
was on, and the dim auditorium was sparsely
populated. The three ladies sat halfway down front,
in the smell of ancient brass polish, and watched
the manager step through the worn red velvet
curtains to make an announcement.
“The police have asked us to close early
tonight so everyone can be out at a decent hour.
Therefore we are cutting our short subjects and
running our feature again immediately. The show will
be over at eleven. Everyone is advised to go straight
home. Don’t linger on the streets.”
“That means us, Lavinia!” whispered
Francine.
The lights went out. The screen leaped to
life.
“Lavinia,” whispered Helen.
“What?”
“As we came in, a man in a dark suit,
across the street, crossed over. He just walked
down the aisle and is sitting in the row behind
us.”
“Oh, Helen!”
“Right behind us?”
One by one the three women turned to
look.
They saw a white face there, flickering
with unholy light from the silver screen. It
seemed to be all men’s faces hovering there in
the dark.
“I’m going to get the manager!” Helen
was gone up the aisle. “Stop the film! Lights!”
“Helen, come back!” cried Lavinia, rising.
They tapped their empty soda glasses
down, each with a vanilla mustache on their
upper lip, which they found with their tongues,
laughing.
“You see how silly?” said Lavinia. “All that
riot for nothing. How embarrassing.”
“I’m sorry,” said Helen faintly.
The clock said eleven-thirty now. They
had come out of the dark theater, away from the
fluttering rush of men and women hurrying
everywhere, nowhere, on the street while
laughing at Helen. Helen was trying to laugh at
herself.
“Helen, when you ran up that aisle crying,
‘Lights!’ I thought I’d die! That poor man!”
“The theater manager’s brother from
Racine!”
“I apologized,” said Helen, looking up at
the great fan still whirling, whirling the warm late
night air, stirring, restirring the smells of vanilla,
raspberry, peppermint and Lysol.
“We shouldn’t have stopped for these
sodas. The police warned—” “Oh, bosh the 
police,” laughed Lavinia. “I’m not afraid of
anything. The Lonely One is a million miles away
now. He won’t be back for weeks and the police’ll
get him then, just wait. Wasn’t the film
wonderful?”
“Closing up, ladies.” The druggist
switched off the lights in the cool white-tiled
silence.
Outside, the streets were swept clean and
empty of cars or trucks or people. Bright lights still
burned in the small store windows where the
warm wax dummies lifted pink wax hands fired
with blue-white diamond rings, or flourished
orange wax legs to reveal hosiery. The hot blueglass eyes of the mannequins watched as the
ladies drifted down the empty river bottom street,
their images shimmering in the windows like
blossoms seen under darkly moving waters.
“Do you suppose if we screamed they’d
do anything?”
“Who?”
“The dummies, the window people.”
“Oh, Francine.”
“Well. . .”
There were a thousand people in the
windows, stiff and silent, and three people on the
street, the echoes following like gunshots from
store fronts across the way when they tapped
their heels on the baked pavement.
A red neon sign flickered dimly, buzzed
like a dying insect, as they passed.
Baked and white, the long avenues lay
ahead. Blowing and tall in a wind that touched
only their leafy summits, the trees stood on
either side of the three small women. Seen from
the courthouse peak, they appeared like three
thistles far away.
“First, we’ll walk you home, Francine.”
“No, I’ll walk you home.”
“Don’t be silly. You live way out at Electric
Park. If you walked me home you’d have to come
back across the ravine alone, yourself. And if so
much as a leaf fell on you, you’d drop dead.”
Francine said, “I can stay the night at your
house. You’re the pretty one!”
And so they walked, they drifted like
three prim clothes forms over a moonlit sea of
lawn and concrete, Lavinia watching the black
trees flit by each side of her, listening to the
voices of her friends murmuring, trying to laugh;
and the night seemed to quicken, they seemed to
run while walking slowly, everything seemed fast
and the color of hot snow.
“Let’s sing,” said Lavinia.
They sang, “Shine On, Shine On, Harvest
Moon ...”
They sang sweetly and quietly, arm in
arm, not looking back. They felt the hot sidewalk
cooling underfoot, moving, moving.
“Listen!” said Lavinia.
They listened to the summer night. The
summer-night crickets and the far-off tone of the
courthouse clock making it eleven forty-five.
“Listen!”
Lavinia listened. A porch swing creaked
in the dark and there was Mr. Terle, not saying
anything to anybody, alone on his swing, having a
last cigar. They saw the pink ash swinging gently to
and fro.
Now the lights were going, going, gone.
The little house lights and big house lights and
yellow lights and green hurricane lights, the candles
and oil lamps and porch lights, and everything felt
locked up in brass and iron and steel, everything,
thought Lavinia, is boxed and locked and wrapped
and shaded. She imagined the people in their
moonlit beds. And their breathing in the summernight rooms, safe and together. And here we are,
thought Lavinia, our footsteps on along the baked
summer evening sidewalk. And above us the
lonely street lights shining down, making a
drunken shadow.
“Here’s your house, Francine. Good night.”
“Lavinia, Helen, stay here tonight. It’s late,
almost midnight now. You can sleep in the parlor. I’ll
make hot chocolate—it’ll be such fun!” Francine was
holding them both now, close to her.
“No, thanks,” said Lavinia.
And Francine began to cry.
“Oh, not again, Francine,” said Lavinia.
“I don’t want you dead,” sobbed Francine,
the tears running straight down her cheeks.
“You’re so fine and nice, I want you alive. Please,
oh, please!”
“Francine, I didn’t know how much this has
done to you. I promise I’ll phone when I get home.”
“Oh, will you?”
“And tell you I’m safe, yes. And tomorrow
we’ll have a picnic lunch at Electric Park. With ham
sandwiches I’ll make myself, how’s that? You’ll
see, I’ll live forever!”
“You’ll phone, then?”
“I promised, didn’t I?”
“Good night, good night!” Rushing upstairs,
Francine whisked behind a door, which slammed to
be snap-bolted tight on the instant. “Now,” said
Lavinia to Helen, “I’ll walk you home.”
The courthouse clock struck the hour. The
sounds blew across a town that was empty,
emptier than it had ever been. Over empty streets
and empty lots and empty lawns the sound faded.
“Nine, ten, eleven, twelve,” counted
Lavinia, with Helen on her arm.
“Don’t you feel funny?” asked Helen.
“How do you mean?”
“When you think of us being out here on the
sidewalks, under the trees, and all those people
safe behind locked doors, lying in their beds. We’re
practically the only walking people out in the open
in a thousand miles, I bet.”
The sound of the deep warm dark ravine
came near.
In a minute they stood before Helen’s
house, looking at each other for a long time. The
wind blew the odor of cut grass between them. The
moon was sinking in a sky that was beginning to
cloud. “I don’t suppose it’s any use asking you to
stay, Lavinia?”
“I’ll be going on.”
“Sometimes—”
“Sometimes what?”
“Sometimes I think people want to die.
You’ve acted odd all evening.”
“I’m just not afraid,” said Lavinia. “And I’m
curious, I suppose. And I’m using my head.
Logically, the Lonely One can’t be around. The
police and all.”
“The police are home with their covers up
over their ears.”
“Let’s just say I’m enjoying myself,
precariously, but safely. If there was any real
chance of anything happening to me, I’d stay here
with you, you can be sure of that.”
“Maybe part of you doesn’t want to live
anymore.”
“You and Francine. Honestly!”
“I feel so guilty. I’ll be drinking some hot
cocoa just as you reach the ravine bottom and walk
on the bridge.”
“Drink a cup for me. Good night.”
Lavinia Nebbs walked alone down the
midnight street, down the late summer-night silence.
She saw houses with the dark windows and far away
she heard a dog barking. In five minutes, she
thought, I’ll be safe at home. In five minutes I’ll be
phoning silly little Francine. I’ll—”
She heard the man’s voice.
A man’s voice singing far away among the
trees.
“Oh, give me a June night, the moonlight and
you . . .”
She walked a little faster.
The voice sang, “In my arms . . . with all
your charms ...”
Down the street in the dim moonlight a man
walked slowly and casually along.
I can run knock on one of these doors,
thought Lavinia, if I must.
“Oh, give me a June night,” sang the
man, and he carried a long club in his hand. “The
moonlight and you. Well, look who’s here1
. What a
time of night for you to be out, Miss Nebbs!”
“Officer Kennedy!”
And that’s who it was, of course.
“I’d better see you home!”
“Thanks, I’ll make it.”
“But you live across the ravine. . . .”
Yes, she thought, but I won’t walk
through the ravine with any man, not even an
officer. How do I know who the Lonely One is?
“No,” she said, “I’ll hurry.”
“I’ll wait right here,” he said. “If you need
any help, give a yell. Voices carry good here. I’ll
come running.”
“Thank you.”
She went on, leaving him under a light,
humming to himself, alone.
Here I am, she thought.
The ravine.
She stood on the edge of the one
hundred and thirteen steps that went down the
steep hill and then across the bridge seventy
yards and up the hills leading to Park Street.
And only one lantern to see by. Three minutes
from now, she thought, I’ll be putting my key in
my house door. Nothing can happen in just one
hundred eighty seconds.
She started down the long dark-green
steps into the deep ravine.
“One, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten steps,” she counted in a whisper.
She felt she was running, but she was
not running.
“Fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen,
nineteen, twenty steps,” she breathed.
“One fifth of the way!” she announced to
herself.
The ravine was deep, black and black,
black! And the world was gone behind, the world
of safe people in bed, the locked doors, the town,
the drugstore, the theater, the lights, everything
was gone. Only the ravine existed and lived,
black and huge, about her.
“Nothing’s happened, has it? No one
around, is there? Twenty-four, twenty-five steps.
Remember that old ghost story you told each
other when you were children?”
She listened to her shoes on the steps.
“The story about the dark man coming in
your house and you upstairs in bed. And now
he’s at the first step coming up to your room. And
now he’s at the second step. And now he’s at
the third step and the fourth step and the fifth!
Oh, how you used to laugh and scream at that
story! And now the horrid dark man’s at the
twelfth step and now he’s opening the door of
your room and now he’s standing by your bed. ‘I
GOT YOU!’ “
She screamed. It was like nothing she’d
ever heard, that scream. She had never
screamed that loud in her life. She stopped, she
froze, she clung to the wooden banister. Her
heart exploded in her. The sound of the terrified
beating filled the universe.
“There, there!” she screamed to herself.
“At the bottom of the steps. A man, under the light!
No, now he’s gone! He was waiting there!”
She listened.
Silence.
The bridge was empty.
Nothing, she thought, holding her heart.
Nothing. Fool! That story I told myself. How silly.
What shall I do?
Her heartbeats faded.
Shall I call the officer—did he hear me
scream?
She listened. Nothing. Nothing.
I’ll go the rest of the way. That silly story.
She began again, counting the steps.
“Thirty-five, thirty-six, careful, don’t fall.
Oh, I am a fool. Thirty-seven steps, thirty-eight,
nine and forty, and two makes forty-two—
almost halfway.”
She froze again.
Wait, she told herself.
She took a step. There was an echo.
She took another step.
Another echo. Another step, just a
fraction of a moment later.
“Someone’s following me,” she
whispered to the ravine, to the black crickets and
dark-green hidden frogs and the black stream.
“Someone’s on the steps behind me. I don’t dare
turn around.”
Another step, another echo.
“Every time I take a step, they take one.”
A step and an echo.
Weakly she asked of the ravine, “Officer
Kennedy, is that you?”
The crickets were still.
The crickets were listening. The night was
listening to her. For a change, all of the far
summer-night meadows and close summer-night
trees were suspending motion; leaf, shrub, star, and
meadow grass ceased their particular tremors and
were listening to Lavinia Nebbs’s heart. And
perhaps a thousand miles away, across
locomotive-lonely country, in an empty way station,
a single traveler reading a dim newspaper under a
solitary naked bulb, might raise up his head, listen,
and think, What’s that? and decide, Only a
woodchuck, surely, beating on a hollow log. But it
was Lavinia Nebbs, it was most surely the heart of
Lavinia Nebbs.
Silence. A summer-night silence which lay
for a thousand miles, which covered the earth like a 
white and shadowy sea. Faster, faster! She went
down the steps. Run!
She heard music. In a mad way, in a silly
way, she heard the great surge of music that
pounded at her, and she realized as she ran, as
she ran in panic and terror, that some part of her
mind was dramatizing, borrowing from the turbulent
musical score of some private drama, and the music
was rushing and pushing her now, higher and
higher, faster, faster, plummeting and scurrying,
down, and down into the pit of the ravine.
Only a little way, she prayed. One hundred
eight, nine, one hundred ten steps! The bottom! Now,
run! Across the bridge!
She told her legs what to do, her arms, her
body, her terror; she advised all parts of herself in
this white and terrible moment, over the roaring
creek waters, on the hollow, thudding, swaying
almost alive, resilient bridge planks she ran,
followed by the wild footsteps behind, behind, with
the music following, too, the music shrieking and
babbling.
He’s following, don’t turn, don’t look, if you
see him, you’ll not be able to move, you’ll be so
frightened. Just run, run! She ran across the bridge.
Oh, God, God, please, please let me get up
the hill! Now up the path, now between the hills, oh
God, it’s dark, and everything so far away. If I
screamed now it wouldn’t help; I can’t scream
anyway. Here’s the top of the path, here’s the street,
oh, God, please let me be safe, if I get home safe
I’ll never go out alone; I was a fool, let me admit it, I
was a fool, I didn’t know what terror was, but if you
let me get home from this I’ll never go without
Helen or Francine again! Here’s the street. Across
the street! She crossed the street and rushed up
the sidewalk. Oh God, the porch! My house! Oh
God, please give me time to get inside and lock the
door and I’ll be safe!
And there—silly thing to notice—why did
she notice, instantly, no time, no time—but there it
was anyway, flashing by—there on the porch rail,
the half-filled glass of lemonade she had
abandoned a long time, a year, half an evening
ago! The lemonade glass sitting calmly,
imperturbably there on the rail,. . . and . . .
She heard her clumsy feet on the porch
and listened and felt her hands scrabbling and
ripping at the lock with the key. She heard her
heart. She heard her inner voice screaming.
The key fit.
Unlock the door, quick, quick!
The door opened.
Now, inside. Slam it!
She slammed the door.
“Now lock it, bar it, lock it!” she gasped
wretchedly.
“Lock it, tight, tight!”
The door was locked and bolted tight.
The music stopped. She listened to her
heart again and the sound of it diminishing into
silence.
Home! Oh God, safe at home! Safe, safe
and safe at home! She slumped against the door.
Safe, safe. Listen. Not a sound. Safe, safe, oh thank
God, safe at home. I’ll never go out at night again.
I’ll stay home. I won’t go over that ravine again ever.
Safe, oh safe, safe home, so good, so good, safe!
Safe inside, the door locked. Wait.
Look out the window.
She looked.
Why, there’s no one there at all! Nobody.
There was nobody following me at all. Nobody
running after me. She got her breath and almost
laughed at herself. It stands to reason If a man had
been following me, he’d have caught me! I’m not a
fast runner. . . . There’s no one on the porch or in
the yard. How silly of me. I wasn’t running from
anything. That ravine’s as safe as anyplace. Just
the same, it’s nice to be home. Home’s the really
good warm place, the only place to be.
She put her hand out to the light switch
and stopped.
“What?” she asked. “What, what?”
Behind her in the living room, someone
cleared his throat.