L. AELIUS LAMIA, born in Italy of illustrious parents, had not yet discarded the toga
proetexta when he set out for the schools of Athens to study philosophy. Subsequently he took
up his residence at Rome, and in his house on the Esquiline, amid a circle of youthful wastrels,
abandoned himself to licentious courses. But being accused of engaging in criminal relations
with Lepida, the wife of Sulpicius Quirinus, a man of consular rank, and being found guilty, he
was exiled by Tiberius Caesar. At that time he was just entering his twenty-fourth year. During
the eighteen years that his exile lasted he traversed Syria, Palestine, Cappadocia, and Armenia,
and made prolonged visits to Antioch, Caesarea, and Jerusalem. When, after the death of
Tiberius, Caius was raised to the purple, Lamia obtained permission to return to Rome. He even
regained a portion of his possessions. Adversity had taught him wisdom.
He avoided all intercourse with the wives and daughters of Roman citizens, made no
efforts toward obtaining office, held aloof from public honours, and lived a secluded life in his
house on the Esquiline. Occupying himself with the task of recording all the remarkable things
he had seen during his distant travels, he turned, as he said, the vicissitudes of his years of
expiation into a diversion for his hours of rest. In the midst of these calm enjoyments, alternating
with assiduous study of the works of Epicurus, he recognized with a mixture of surprise and
vexation that age was stealing upon him. In his sixty-second year, being afflicted with an illness
which proved in no slight degree troublesome, he decided to have recourse to the waters at
Baiae. The coast at that point, once frequented by the halcyon, was at this date the resort of the
wealthy Roman, greedy for pleasure. For a week Lamia lived alone, without a friend in the 
2
brilliant crowd. Then one day, after dinner, an inclination to which he yielded urged him to
ascend the inclines, which, covered with vines that resembled bacchantes, looked out upon the
waves.
Having reached the summit he seated himself by the side of a path beneath a terebinth,
and let his glances wander over the lovely landscape. To his left, livid and bare, the Phlegraean
plain stretched out towards the ruins of Cumae. On his right, Cape Misenum plunged its abrupt
spur beneath the Tyrrhenian sea. Beneath his feet luxurious Baiae, following the graceful outline
of the coast, displayed its gardens, its villas thronged with statues, its porticos, its marble terraces
along the shores of the blue ocean where the dolphins sported. Before him, on the other side of
the bay, on the Campanian coast, gilded by the already sinking sun, gleamed the temples which
far away rose above the laurels of Posilippo, whilst on the extreme horizon Vesuvius looked
forth smiling.
Lamia drew from a fold of his toga a scroll containing the Treatise upon Nature,
extended himself upon the ground, and began to read. But the warning cries of a slave
necessitated his rising to allow of the passage of a litter which was being carried along the
narrow pathway through the vineyards. The litter being uncurtained, permitted Lamia to see
stretched upon the cushions as it was borne nearer to him the figure of an elderly man of
immense bulk, who, supporting his head on his hand, gazed out with a gloomy and disdainful
expression. His nose, which was aquiline, and his chin, which was prominent, seemed desirous
of meeting across his lips, and his jaws were powerful.
From the first moment Lamia was convinced that the face was familiar to him. He
hesitated a moment before the name came to him. Then suddenly hastening towards the litter
with a display of surprise and delight—
3
“Pontius Pilate!” he cried. “The gods be praised who have permitted me to see you once
again!”
The old man gave a signal to the slaves to stop, and cast a keen glance upon the stranger
who had addressed him.
“Pontius, my dear host,” resumed the latter, “have twenty years so far whitened my hair
and hollowed my cheeks that you no longer recognise your friend AElius Lamia?”
At this name Pontius Pilate dismounted from the litter as actively as the weight of his
years and the heaviness of his gait permitted him, and embraced AElius Lamia again and again.
“Gods! what a treat it is to me to see you once more! But, alas, you call up memories of
those long-vanished days when I was Procurator of Judaea, in the province of Syria. Why, it
must be thirty years ago that I first met you. It was at Caesarea, whither you came to drag out
your weary term of exile. I was fortunate enough to alleviate it a little, and out of friendship,
Lamia, you followed me to that depressing place Jerusalem, where the Jews filled me with
bitterness and disgust. You remained for more than ten years my guest and my companion, and
in converse about Rome and things Roman we both of us managed to find consolation—you for
your misfortunes, and I for my burdens of State.”
Lamia embraced him afresh.
“You forget two things, Pontius; you are overlooking the facts that you used your
influence on my behalf with Herod Antipas, and that your purse was freely open to me.”
“Let us not talk of that,” replied Pontius, “since after your return to Rome you sent me by
one of your freedmen a sum of money which repaid me with usury.”
4
“Pontius, I could never consider myself out of your debt by the mere payment of money.
But tell me, have the gods fulfilled your desires? Are you in the enjoyment of all the happiness
you deserve? Tell me about your family, your fortunes, your health.”
“I have withdrawn to Sicily, where I possess estates, and where I cultivate wheat for the
market. My eldest daughter, my best-beloved Pontia, who has been left a widow, lives with me,
and directs my household. The gods be praised, I have preserved my mental vigour; my memory
is not in the least degree enfeebled. But old age always brings in its train a long procession of
griefs and infirmities. I am cruelly tormented with gout. And at this very moment you find me on
my way to the Phlegraean plain in search of a remedy for my sufferings. From that burning soil,
whence at night flames burst forth, proceed acrid exhalations of sulphur, which, so they say, ease
the pains and restore suppleness to the stiffened joints. At least, the physicians assure me that it
is so.”
“May you find it so in your case, Pontius! But, despite the gout and its burning torments,
you scarcely look as old as myself, although in reality you must be my senior by ten years.
Unmistakably you have retained a greater degree of vigour than I ever possessed, and I am
overjoyed to find you looking so hale. Why, dear friend, did you retire from the public service
before the customary age? Why, on resigning your governorship in Judaea, did you withdraw to
a voluntary exile on your Sicilian estates? Give me an account of your doings from the moment
that I ceased to be a witness of them. You were preparing to suppress a Samaritan rising when I
set out for Cappadocia, where I hoped to draw some profit from the breeding of horses and
mules. I have not seen you since then. How did that expedition succeed? Pray tell me.
Everything interests me that concerns you in any way.”
Pontius Pilate sadly shook his head.
5
“My natural disposition,” he said, “as well as a sense of duty, impelled me to fulfil my
public responsibilities, not merely with diligence, but even with ardour. But I was pursued by
unrelenting hatred. Intrigues and calumnies cut short my career in its prime, and the fruit it
should have looked to bear has withered away. You ask me about the Samaritan insurrection. Let
us sit down on this hillock. I shall be able to give you an answer in few words. These
occurrences are as vividly present to me as if they had happened yesterday.
“A man of the people, of persuasive speech—there are many such to be met with in
Syria—induced the Samaritans to gather together in arms on Mount Gerizim (which in that
country is looked upon as a holy place) under the promise that he would disclose to their sight
the sacred vessels which in the ancient days of Evander and our father, AEneas, had been hidden
away by an eponymous hero, or rather a tribal deity, named Moses. Upon this assurance the
Samaritans rose in rebellion; but having been warned in time to forestall them, I dispatched
detachments of infantry to occupy the mountain, and stationed cavalry to keep the approaches to
it under observation.
“These measures of prudence were urgent. The rebels were already laying siege to the
town of Tyrathaba, situated at the foot of Mount Gerizim. I easily dispersed them, and stifled the
as yet scarcely organized revolt. Then, in order to give a forcible example with as few victims as
possible, I handed over to execution the leaders of the rebellion. But you are aware, Lamia, in
what strait dependence I was kept by the proconsul Vitellius, who governed Syria not in, but
against the interests of Rome, and looked upon the provinces of the empire as territories which
could be farmed out to tetrarchs. The head men among the Samaritans, in their resentment
against me, came and fell at his feet lamenting. To listen to them, nothing had been further from
their thoughts than to disobey Caesar. It was I who had provoked the rising, and it was purely in 
6
order to withstand my violence that they had gathered together around Tyrathaba. Vitellius
listened to their complaints, and handing over the affairs of Judaea to his friend Marcellus,
commanded me to go and justify my proceedings before the Emperor himself. With a heart
overflowing with grief and resentment I took ship. Just as I approached the shores of Italy,
Tiberius, worn out with age and the cares of empire, died suddenly on the self-same Cape
Misenum, whose peak we see from this very spot magnified in the mists of evening. I demanded
justice of Caius, his successor, whose perception was naturally acute, and who was acquainted
with Syrian affairs. But marvel with me, Lamia, at the maliciousness of fortune, resolved on my
discomfiture. Caius then had in his suite at Rome the Jew Agrippa, his companion, the friend of
his childhood, whom he cherished as his own eyes. Now Agrippa favoured Vitellius, inasmuch
as Vitellius was the enemy of Antipas, whom Agrippa pursued with his hatred. The Emperor
adopted the prejudices of his beloved Asiatic, and refused even to listen to me. There was
nothing for me to do but bow beneath the stroke of unmerited misfortune. With tears for my meat
and gall for my portion, I withdrew to my estates in Sicily, where I should have died of grief if
my sweet Pontia had not come to console her father. I have cultivated wheat, and succeeded in
producing the fullest ears in the whole province. But now my life is ended; the future will judge
between Vitellius and me.”
“Pontius,” replied Lamia, “I am persuaded that you acted towards the Samaritans
according to the rectitude of your character, and solely in the interests of Rome. But were you
not perchance on that occasion a trifle too much influenced by that impetuous courage which has
always swayed you? You will remember that in Judaea it often happened that I who, younger
than you, should naturally have been more impetuous than you, was obliged to urge you to
clemency and suavity.”
7
“Suavity towards the Jews!” cried Pontius Pilate.”Although you have lived amongst
them, it seems clear that you ill understand those enemies of the human race. Haughty and at the
same time base, combining an invincible obstinacy with a despicably mean spirit, they weary
alike your love and your hatred. My character, Lamia, was formed upon the maxims of the
divine Augustus. When I was appointed Procurator of Judaea, the world was already penetrated
with the majestic ideal of the pax romana . No longer, as in the days of our internecine strife,
were we witnesses to the sack of a province for the aggrandizement of a proconsul. I knew where
my duty lay. I was careful that my actions should be governed by prudence and moderation. The
gods are my witnesses that I was resolved upon mildness, and upon mildness only. Yet what did
my benevolent intentions avail me? You were at my side, Lamia, when, at the outset of my
career as ruler, the first rebellion came to a head. Is there any need for me to recall the details to
you? The garrison had been transferred from Caesarea to take up its winter quarters at Jerusalem.
Upon the ensigns of the legionaries appeared the presentment of Caesar. The inhabitants of
Jerusalem, who did not recognize the indwelling divinity of the Emperor, were scandalized at
this, as though, when obedience is compulsory, it were not less abject to obey a god than a man.
The priests of their nation appeared before my tribunal imploring me with supercilious humility
to have the ensigns removed from within the holy city. Out of reverence for the divine nature of
Caesar and the majesty of the empire, I refused to comply. Then the rabble made common cause
with the priests, and all around the pretorium portentous cries of supplication arose. I ordered the
soldiers to stack their spears in front of the tower of Antonia, and to proceed, armed only with
sticks like lictors, to disperse the insolent crowd. But, heedless of blows, the Jews continued their
entreaties, and the more obstinate amongst them threw themselves on the ground and, exposing
their throats to the rods, deliberately courted death. You were a witness of my humiliation on that 
8
occasion, Lamia. By the order of Vitellius I was forced to send the insignia back to Caesarea.
That disgrace I had certainly not merited. Before the immortal gods I swear that never once
during my term of office did I flout justice and the laws. But I am grown old. My enemies and
detractors are dead. I shall die unavenged. Who will not retrieve my character?”
He moaned and lapsed into silence. Lamia replied:
“That man is prudent who neither hopes nor fears anything from the uncertain events of
the future. Does it matter in the least what estimate men may form of us hereafter? We ourselves
are after all our own witnesses, and our own judges. You must rely, Pontius Pilate, on the
testimony you yourself bear to your own rectitude. Be content with your own personal respect
and that of your friends. For the rest, we know that mildness by itself will not suffice for the
work of government. There is but little room in the actions of public men for that indulgence of
human frailty which the philosophers recommend.”
“We‟ll say no more at present,” said Pontius.”The sulphurous fumes which rise from the
Phlegraean plain are more powerful when the ground which exhales them is still warm beneath
the sun‟s rays. I must hasten on. Adieu! But now that I have rediscovered a friend, I should wish
to take advantage of my good fortune. Do me the favour, AElius Lamia, to give me your
company at supper at my house to-morrow. My house stands on the seashore, at the extreme end
of the town in the direction of Misenum. You will easily recognize it by the porch, which bears a
painting representing Orpheus surrounded by tigers and lions, whom he is charming with the
strains from his lyre.
“Till to-morrow, Lamia,” he repeated, as he climbed once more into his litter.”Tomorrow we will talk about Judaea.”
9
The following day at the supper hour Lamia presented himself at the house of Pontius
Pilate. Two couches only were in readiness for occupants. Creditably but simply equipped, the
table held a silver service in which were set out beccaficos in honey, thrushes, oysters from the
Lucrine lake, and lampreys from Sicily. As they proceeded with their repast, Pontius and Lamia
interchanged inquiries with one another about their ailments, the symptoms of which they
described at considerable length, mutually emulous of communicating the various remedies
which had been recommended to them. Then, congratulating themselves on being thrown
together once more at Baiae, they vied with one another in praise of the beauty of that enchanting
coast and the mildness of the climate they enjoyed. Lamia was enthusiastic about the charms of
the courtesans who frequented the seashore laden with golden ornaments and trailing draperies
of barbaric broidery. But the aged Procurator deplored the ostentation with which by means of
trumpery jewels and filmy garments foreigners and even enemies of the empire beguiled the
Romans of their gold. After a time they turned to the subject of the great engineering feats that
had been accomplished in the country; the prodigious bridge constructed by Caius between
Puteoli and Baiae, and the canals which Augustus excavated to convey the waters of the ocean to
Lake Avernus and the Lucrine lake.
“I also,” said Pontius, with a sigh, “I also wished to set afoot public works of great utility.
When, for my sins, I was appointed Governor of Judaea, I conceived the idea of furnishing
Jerusalem with an abundant supply of pure water by means of an aqueduct. The elevation of the
levels, the proportionate capacity of the various parts, the gradient for the brazen reservoirs to
which the distribution pipes were to be fixed—I had gone into every detail, and decided
everything for myself with the assistance of mechanical experts. I had drawn up regulations for
the superintendents so as to prevent individuals from making unauthorized depredations. The 
10
architects and the workmen had their instructions. I gave orders for the commencement of
operations. But far from viewing with satisfaction the construction of that conduit, which was
intended to carry to their town upon its massive arches not only water but health, the inhabitants
of Jerusalem gave vent to lamentable outcries. They gathered tumultuously together, exclaiming
against the sacrilege and impiousness, and hurling themselves upon the workmen, scattered the
very foundation stones. Can you picture to yourself, Lamia, a filthier set of barbarians?
Nevertheless, Vitellius decided in their favour, and I received orders to put a stop to the work.”
“It is a knotty point,” said Lamia, “how far one is justified in devising things for the
commonweal against the will of the populace.”
Pontius Pilate continued as though he had not heard this interruption.
“Refuse an aqueduct! What madness! But whatever is of Roman origin is distasteful to
the Jews. In their eyes we are an unclean race, and our very presence appears a profanation to
them. You will remember that they would never venture to enter the pretorium for fear of
defiling themselves, and that I was consequently obliged to discharge my magisterial functions in
an open-air tribunal on that marble pavement your feet so often trod.
“They fear us and they despise us. Yet is not Rome the mother and warden of all these
peoples who nestle smiling upon her venerable bosom? With her eagles in the van, peace and
liberty have been carried to the very confines of the universe. Those whom we have subdued we
look on as our friends, and we leave those conquered races, nay, we secure to them the
permanence of their customs and their laws. Did Syria, aforetime rent asunder by its rabble of
petty kings, ever even begin to taste of peace and prosperity until it submitted to the armies of
Pompey? And when Rome might have reaped a golden harvest as the price of her goodwill, did
she lay hands on the hoards that swell the treasuries of barbaric temples? Did she despoil the 
11
shrine of Cybele at Pessinus, or the Morimene and Cilician sanctuaries of Jupiter, or the temple
of the Jewish god at Jerusalem? Antioch, Palmyra, and Apamea, secure despite their wealth, and
no longer in dread of the wandering Arab of the desert, have erected temples to the genius of
Rome and the divine Caesar. The Jews alone hate and withstand us. They withhold their tribute
till it is wrested from them, and obstinately rebel against military service.”
“The Jews,” replied Lamia, “are profoundly attached to their ancient customs. They
suspected you, unreasonably I admit, of a desire to abolish their laws and change their usages.
Do not resent it, Pontius, if I say that you did not always act in such a way as to disperse their
unfortunate illusion. It gratified you, despite your habitual self-restraint, to play upon their fears,
and more than once have I seen you betray in their presence the contempt with which their
beliefs and religious ceremonies inspired you. You irritated them particularly by giving
instructions for the sacredotal garments and ornaments of their high priest to be kept in ward by
your legionaries in the Antonine tower. One must admit that though they have never risen like us
to an appreciation of things divine, the Jews celebrate rites which their very antiquity renders
venerable.”
Pontius Pilate shrugged his shoulders.
“They have very little exact knowledge of the nature of the gods,” he said.”They worship
Jupiter, yet they abstain from naming him or erecting a statue of him. They do not even adore
him under the semblance of a rude stone, as certain of the Asiatic peoples are wont to do. They
know nothing of Apollo, of Neptune, of Mars, nor of Pluto, nor of any goddess. At the same
time, I am convinced that in days gone by they worshipped Venus. For even to this day their
women bring doves to the altar as victims; and you know as well as I that the dealers who trade
beneath the arcades of their temple supply those birds in couples for sacrifice. I have even been 
12
told that on one occasion some madman proceeded to overturn the stalls bearing these offerings,
and their owners with them. The priests raised an outcry about it, and looked on it as a case of
sacrilege. I am of opinion that their custom of sacrificing turtle-doves was instituted in honour of
Venus. Why are you laughing, Lamia?”
“I was laughing,” said Lamia, “at an amusing idea which, I hardly know how, just
occurred to me. I was thinking that perchance some day the Jupiter of the Jews might come to
Rome and vent his fury upon you. Why should he not? Asia and Africa have already enriched us
with a considerable number of gods. We have seen temples in honour of Isis and the dog-faced
Anubis erected in Rome. In the public squares, and even on the race-courses, you may run across
the Bona Dea of the Syrians mounted on an ass. And did you never hear how, in the reign of
Tiberius, a young patrician passed himself off as the horned Jupiter of the Egyptians, Jupiter
Ammon, and in this disguise procured the favours of an illustrious lady who was too virtuous to
deny anything to a god? Beware, Pontius, lest the invisible Jupiter of the Jews disembark some
day on the quay at Ostia!”
At the idea of a god coming out of Judaea, a fleeting smile played over the severe
countenance of the Procurator. Then he replied gravely:
“How would the Jews manage to impose their sacred law on outside peoples when they
are in a perpetual state of tumult amongst themselves as to the interpretation of that law? You
have seen them yourself, Lamia, in the public squares, split up into twenty rival parties, with
staves in their hands, abusing each other and clutching one another by the beard. You have seen
them on the steps of the temple, tearing their filthy garments as a symbol of lamentation, with
some wretched creature in a frenzy of prophetic exaltation in their midst. They have never
realized that it is possible to discuss peacefully and with an even mind those matters concerning 
13
the divine which yet are hidden from the profane and wrapped in uncertainty. For the nature of
the immortal gods remains hidden from us, and we cannot arrive at a knowledge of it. Though I
am of opinion, none the less, that it is a prudent thing to believe in the providence of the gods.
But the Jews are devoid of philosophy, and cannot tolerate any diversity of opinions. On the
contrary, they judge worthy of the extreme penalty all those who on divine subjects profess
opinions opposed to their law. And as, since the genius of Rome has towered over them, capital
sentences pronounced by their own tribunals can only be carried out with the sanction of the
proconsul or the procurator, they harry the Roman magistrate at any hour to procure his signature
to their baleful decrees, they besiege the pretorium with their cries of „Death!‟ A hundred times,
at least, have I known them, mustered, rich and poor together, all united under their priests, make
a furious onslaught on my ivory chair, seizing me by the skirts of my robe, by the thongs of my
sandals, and all to demand of me—nay, to exact from me—the death sentence on some
unfortunate whose guilt I failed to perceive, and as to whom I could only pronounce that he was
as mad as his accusers. A hundred times, do I say! Not a hundred, but every day and all day. Yet
it was my duty to execute their law as if it were ours, since I was appointed by Rome not for the
destruction, but for the upholding of their customs, and over them I had the power of the rod and
the axe. At the outset of my term of office I endeavoured to persuade them to hear reason. I
attempted to snatch their miserable victims from death. But this show of mildness only irritated
them the more; they demanded their prey, fighting around me like a horde of vultures with wing
and beak. Their priests reported to Caesar that I was violating their law, and their appeals,
supported by Vitellius, drew down upon me a severe reprimand. How many times did I long, as
the Greeks used to say, to dispatch accusers and accused in one convoy to the crows!
14
“Do not imagine, Lamia, that I nourish the rancour of the discomfited, the wrath of the
superannuated, against a people which in my person has prevailed against both Rome and
tranquillity. But I foresee the extremity to which sooner or later they will reduce us. Since we
cannot govern them, we shall be driven to destroy them. Never doubt it. Always in a state of
insubordination, brewing rebellion in their inflammatory minds, they will one day burst forth
upon us with a fury beside which the wrath of the Numidians and the mutterings of the Parthians
are mere child‟s play. They are secretly nourishing preposterous hopes, and madly premeditating
our ruin. How can it be otherwise, when, on the strength of an oracle, they are living in
expectation of the coming of a prince of their own blood whose kingdom shall extend over the
whole earth? There are no half measures with such a people. They must be exterminated.
Jerusalem must be laid waste to the very foundation. Perchance, old as I am, it may be granted
me to behold the day when her walls shall fall and the flames shall envelop her houses, when her
inhabitants shall pass under the edge of the sword, when salt shall be strewn on the place where
once the temple stood. And in that day I shall at length be justified.”
Lamia exerted himself to lead the conversation back to a less acrimonious note.
“Pontius,” he said, “it is not difficult for me to understand both your long-standing
resentment and your sinister forebodings. Truly, what you have experienced of the character of
the Jews is nothing to their advantage. But I lived in Jerusalem as an interested onlooker, and
mingled freely with the people, and I succeeded in detecting certain obscure virtues in these rude
folk which were altogether hidden from you. I have met Jews who were all mildness, whose
simple manners and faithfulness of heart recalled to me what our poets have related concerning
the Spartan lawgiver. And you yourself, Pontius, have seen perish beneath the cudgels of your
legionaries simple-minded men who have died for a cause they believed to be just without 
15
revealing their names. Such men do not deserve our contempt. I am saying this because it is
desirable in all things to preserve moderation and an even mind. But I own that I never
experienced any lively sympathy for the Jews. The Jewess, on the contrary, I found extremely
pleasing. I was young, then, and the Syrian women stirred all my senses to response. Their ruddy
lips, their liquid eyes that shone in the shade, their sleepy gaze pierced me to the very marrow.
Painted and stained, smelling of nard and myrrh, steeped in odours, their physical attractions are
both rare and delightful.”
Pontius listened impatiently to these praises.
“I was not the kind of man to fall into the snares of the Jewish women,” he said; “and
since you have opened the subject yourself, Lamia, I was never able to approve of your laxity. If
I did not express with sufficient emphasis formerly how culpable I held you for having intrigued
at Rome with the wife of a man of consular rank, it was because you were then enduring heavy
penance for your misdoings. Marriage from the patrician point of view is a sacred tie; it is one of
the institutions which are the support of Rome. As to foreign women and slaves, such relations as
one may enter into with them would be of little account were it not that they habituate the body
to a humiliating effeminacy. Let me tell you that you have been too liberal in your offerings to
the Venus of the Marketplace; and what, above all, I blame in you is that you have not married in
compliance with the law and given children to the Republic, as every good citizen is bound to
do.”
But the man who had suffered exile under Tiberius was no longer listening to the
venerable magistrate. Having tossed off his cap of Falernian, he was smiling at some image
visible to his eye alone.
16
After a moment‟s silence he resumed in a very deep voice, which rose in pitch by little
and little:
“With what languorous grace they dance, those Syrian women! I knew a Jewess at
Jerusalem who used to dance in a poky little room, on a threadbare carpet, by the light of one
smoky little lamp, waving her arms as she clanged her cymbals. Her loins arched, her head
thrown back, and, as it were, dragged down by the weight of her heavy red hair, her eyes
swimming with voluptuousness, eager, languishing, compliant, she would have made Cleopatra
herself grow pale with envy. I was in love with her barbaric dances, her voice—a little raucous
and yet so sweet—her atmosphere of incense, the semi-somnolescent state in which she seemed
to live. I followed her everywhere. I mixed with the vile rabble of soldiers, conjurers, and
extortioners with which she was surrounded. One day, however, she disappeared, and I saw her
no more. Long did I seek her in disreputable alleys and taverns. It was more difficult to learn to
do without her than to lose the taste for Greek wine. Some months after I lost sight of her, I
learned by chance that she had attached herself to a small company of men and women who were
followers of a young Galilean thaumaturgist. His name was Jesus; he came from Nazareth, and
he was crucified for some crime, I don‟t quite know what. Pontius, do you remember anything
about the man?”
Pontius Pilate contracted his brows, and his hand rose to his forehead in the attitude of
one who probes the deeps of memory. Then after a silence of some seconds:
“Jesus?” he murmured, “Jesus—of Nazareth? I cannot call him to mind.”