IN the afternoon the ratcatcher came to the filling station. He came sidling up
the driveway with a stealthy, soft-treading gait, making no noise at all with his
feet on the gravel. He had an army knapsack slung over one shoulder and he was
wearing an old-fashioned black jacket with large pockets. His brown corduroy
trousers were tied around the knees with pieces of white string.
"Yes?" Claud asked, knowing very well who he was.
"Rodent operative." His small dark eyes moved swiftly over the premises.
"The ratcatcher?"
"That's me."
The man was lean and brown with a sharp face and two long sulphur-coloured
teeth that protruded from the upper jaw, overlapping the lower lip, pressing it
inward. The ears were thin and pointed and set far back on the head, near the nape
of the neck. The eyes were almost black, but when they looked at you there was a
flash of yellow somewhere inside them.
"You've come very quick."
"Special orders from the Health Office."
"And now you're going to catch all the rats?"
"Yep."
The kind of dark furtive eyes he had were those of an animal that lives its
life peering out cautiously and forever from a hole in the ground.
"How are you going to catch 'em?"
"Ah-h-h," the ratman said darkly. "That's all accordin' to where they is."
"Trap 'em, I suppose."
"Trap 'em!" he cried, disgusted. "You won't catch many rats that way! Rats
isn't rabbits, you know."
He held his face up high, sniffing the air with a nose that twitched
perceptibly from side to side.
"No," he said, scornfully. "Trappin's no way to catch a rat. Rats is clever,
let me tell you that. If you want to catch 'em, you got to know 'em. You got to
know rats on this job."
I could see Claud staring at him with a certain fascination.
"They're more clever'n dogs, rats is."
"Get away."
"You know what they do? They watch you! All the time you're goin' round
preparin' to catch 'em, they're sittin' quietly in dark places, watchin' you." The
man crouched, stretching his stringy neck far forward.
"So what do you do?" Claud asked, fascinated.
"Ah! That's it, you see. That's where you got to know rats."
"How d'you catch 'em?"
"There's ways," the ratman said, leering. "There's various ways." He paused,
nodding his repulsive head sagely up and down. "It's all dependin'," he said, "on
where they is. This ain't a sewer job, is it?"
"No, it's not a sewer job."
"Tricky things, sewer jobs. Yes," he said, delicately sniffing the air to
the left of him with his mobile nose-end, "sewer jobs is very tricky things."
"Not especially, I shouldn't think."
"Oh-ho. You shouldn't, shouldn't you! Well, I'd like to see you do a sewer
job! Just exactly how would you set about it, I'd like to know?"
"Nothing to it. I'd just poison 'em, that's all."
"And where exactly would you put the poison, might I ask?"
"Down the sewer. Where the hell you think I put it!"
"There!" the ratman cried, triumphant. "I knew it! Down the sewer! And you
know what'd happen then? Get washed away, that's all. Sewer's like a river,
y'know."
"That's what you say," Claud answered. "That's only what you say."
"It's facts."
"All right, then, all right. So what would you do, Mr Know-all?"
"That's exactly where you got to know rats, on a sewer job."
"Come on then, let's have it."
"Now listen. I'll tell you." The ratman advanced a step closer, his voice
became secretive and confidential, the voice of a man divulging fabulous
professional secrets. "You works on the understandin' that a rat is a gnawin'
animal, see. Rats gnaws. Anythin' you give 'em, don't matter what it is, anythin'
new they never seen before, and what do they do? They gnaws it. So now! There you
are! You get a sewer job on your hands. And what d'you do?"
His voice had the soft throaty sound of a croaking frog and he seemed to
speak all his words with an immense wet-lipped relish, as though they tasted good
on the tongue. The accent was similar to Claud's, the broad soft accent of the
Buckinghamshire countryside, but his voice was more throaty, the words more fruity
in his mouth.
"All you do is you go down the sewer and you take along some ordinary paper
bags, just ordinary brown paper bags, and these bags is filled with plaster of
Paris powder. Nothin' else. Then you suspend the bags from the roof of the sewer
so they hang down not quite touchin' the water. See? Not quite touchin', and just
high enough so a rat can reach 'em."
Claud was listening, rapt.
"There you are, y'see. Old rat comes swimmin' along the sewer and sees the
bag. He stops. He takes a sniff at it and it don't smell so bad anyway. So what's
he do then?"
"He gnaws it," Claud cried, delighted.
"There! That's it! That's exactly it! He starts gnawin' away at the bag and
the bag breaks and the old rat gets a mouthful of powder for his pains."
"Well?"
"That does him."
"What? Kills him?"
"Yep. Kills him stony!"
"Plaster of Paris ain't poisonous, you know."
"Ah! There you are! That's exactly where you're wrong, see. This powder
swells. When you wet it, it swells. Gets into the rat's tubes and swells right up
and kills him quicker'n anythin' in the world."
"That's where you got to know rats."
The ratman's face glowed with a stealthy pride, and he rubbed his stringy
fingers together, holding the hands up close to the face. Claud watched him,
fascinated.
"Now--where's them rats?" The word 'rats' came out of his mouth soft and
throaty, with a rich fruity relish as though he were gargling with melted butter.
"Let's take a look at them rraats."
"Over there in the hayrick across the road."
"Not in the house?" he asked, obviously disappointed.
"No. Only around the hayrick. Nowhere else."
"I'll wager they're in the house too. Like as not gettin' in all your food
in the night and spreadin' disease and sickness. You got any disease here?" he
asked, looking first at me, then at Claud.
"Everyone fine here."
"Quite sure?"
"Oh yes."
"You never know, you see. You could be sickenin' for it weeks and weeks and
not feel it. Then all of a sudden--bang!--and it's got you. That's why Dr
Arbuthnot's so particular. That's why he sent me out so quick, see. To stop the
spreadin' of disease."
He had now taken upon himself the mantle of the Health Officer. A most
important rat he was now, deeply disappointed that we were not suffering from
bubonic plague.
"I feel fine," Claud said, nervously.
The ratman searched his face again, but said nothing.
"And how are you goin' to catch 'em in the hayrick?"
The ratman grinned, a crafty toothy grin. He reached down into his knapsack
and withdrew a large tin which he held up level with his face. He peered around
one side of it at Claud.
"Poison!" he whispered. But he pronounced it pye-zn, making it into a soft,
dark, dangerous word. "Deadly pye-zn, that's what this is!" He was weighing the
tin up and down in his hands as he spoke. "Enough here to kill a million men!"
"Terrifying," Claud said.
"Exactly it! They'd put you inside for six months if they caught you with
even a spoonful of this," he said, wetting his lips with his tongue. He had a
habit of craning his head forward on his neck as he spoke.
"Want to see?" he asked, taking a penny from his pocket, prising open the
lid. "There now! There it is!" He spoke fondly, almost lovingly of the stuff, and
he held it forward for Claud to look.
"Corn? Or barley is it?"
"It's oats. Soaked in deadly pye-zn. You take just one of them grains in
your mouth and you'd be a gonner in five minutes."
"Honest?"
"Yep. Never out of me sight, this tin."
He caressed it with his hands and gave it a little shake so that the oat
grains rustled softly inside.
"But not today. Your rats don't get this today. They wouldn't have it
anyway. That they wouldn't. There's where you got to know rats. Rats is
suspicious. Terrible suspicious, rats is. So today they gets some nice clean tasty
oats as'll do 'em no harm in the world. Fatten 'em, that's all it'll do. And
tomorrow they gets the same again. And it'll taste so good there'll be all the
rats in the districk comin' along after a couple of days."
"Rather clever."
"You got to be clever on this job. You got to be cleverer'n a rat and that's
sayin' something."
"You've almost got to be a rat yourself," I said. It slipped out in error,
before I had time to Stop myself, and I couldn't really help it because I was
looking at the man at the time. But the effect upon him was surprising.
"There!" he cried. "Now you got it! Now you really said something! A good
ratter's got to be more like a rat than anythin' else in the world! Cleverer even
than a rat, and that's not an easy thing to be, let me tell you!"
"Quite sure it's not."
"All right, then let's go. I haven't got all day, you know. There's Lady
Leonora Benson asking for me urgent up there at the Manor."
"She got rats, too?"
"Everybody's got rats," the ratman said, and he ambled off down the
driveway, across the road to the hayrick and we watched him go. The way he walked
was so like a rat it made you wonder--that slow, almost delicate ambling walk with
a lot of give at the knees and no sound at all from the footsteps on the gravel.
He hopped nimbly over the gate into the field, then walked quickly round the
hayrick scattering handfuls of oats on to the ground.
The next day he returned and repeated the procedure.
The day after that he came again and this time he put down the poisoned
oats. But he didn't scatter these; he placed them carefully in little piles at
each corner of the rick.
"You got a dog?" he asked when he came back across the road on the third day
after putting down the poison.
"Yes."
"Now if you want to see your dog die an 'orrible twistin' death, all you got
to do is let him in that gate some time."
"We'll take care," Claud told him. "Don't you worry about that."
The next day he returned once more, this time to collect the dead.
"You got an old sack?" he asked. "Most likely we goin' to need a sack to put
'em in."
He was puffed up and important now, the black eyes gleaming with pride. He
was about to display the sensational results of his catch to the audience.
Claud fetched a sack and the three of us walked across the road, the ratman
leading. Claud and I leaned over the gate, watching. The ratman prowled around the
hayrick, bending over to inspect his little piles of poison.
"Somethin' wrong here," he muttered. His voice was soft and angry.
He ambled over to another pile and got down on his knees to examine it
closely.
"Somethin' bloody wrong here."
"What's the matter?"
He didn't answer, but it was clear that the rats hadn't touched his bait.
"These are very clever rats here," I said.
"Exactly what I told him, Gordon. These aren't just no ordinary kind of rats
you're dealing with here."
The ratman walked over to the gate. He was very annoyed and showed it on his
face and around the nose and by the way the two yellow teeth were pressing down
into the skin of his lower lip. "Don't give me that crap," he said, looking at me.
"There's nothing wrong with these rats except somebody's feedin'
'em. They got somethin' juicy to eat somewhere and plenty of it. There's no
rats in the world'll turn down oats unless their bellies is full to burstin'."
"They're clever," Claud said.
The man turned away, disgusted. He knelt down again and began to scoop up
the poisoned oats with a small shovel, tipping them carefully back into the tin.
When he had done, all three of us walked back across the road.
The ratman stood near the petrol-pumps, a rather sorry, humble ratman now
whose face was beginning to take on a brooding aspect. He had withdrawn into
himself and was brooding in silence over his failure, the eyes veiled and wicked,
the little tongue darting out to one side of the two yellow teeth, keeping the
lips moist. It appeared to be essential that the lips should be kept moist. He
looked up at me, a quick surreptitious glance, then over at Claud. His nose-end
twitched, sniffing the air. He raised himself up and down a few times on his toes,
swaying gently, and in a voice soft and secretive, he said: "Want to see
somethin'?" He was obviously trying to retrieve his reputation.
"What?"
"Want to see somethin' amazin'?" As he said this he put his right hand into
the deep poacher's pocket of his jacket and brought out a large live rat clasped
tight between his fingers.
"Good God!"
"Ah! That's it, y'see!" He was crouching slightly now and craning his neck
forward and leering at us and holding this enormous brown rat in his hands, one
finger and thumb making a tight circle around the creature's neck, clamping its
head rigid so it couldn't turn and bite.
"D'you usually carry rats around in your pockets?"
"Always got a rat or two about me somewhere." With that he put his free hand
into the other pocket and produced a small white ferret.
"Ferret," he said, holding it up by the neck.
The ferret seemed to know him and stayed still in his grasp.
"There's nothin'll kill a rat quicker'n a ferret. And there's nothin' a
rat's more frightened of either."
He brought his hands close together in front of him so that the ferret's
nose was within six inches of the rat's face. The pink beady eyes of the ferret
stared at the rat. The rat struggled, trying to edge away from the killer.
"Now," he said. "Watch!"
His khaki shirt was open at the neck and he lifted the rat and slipped it
down inside his shirt, next to his skin. As soon as his hand was free, he
unbuttoned his jacket at the front so that the audience could see the bulge the
body of the rat made under his shirt. His belt prevented it from going down lower
than his waist.
Then he slipped the ferret in after the rat.
Immediately there was a great commotion inside the shirt. It appeared that
the rat was running around the man's body, being chased by the ferret. Six or
seven times they went around, the small bulge chasing the larger one, gaining on
it slightly each circuit and drawing closer and closer until at last the two
bulges seemed to come together and there was a scuffle and a series of shrill
shrieks.
Throughout this performance the ratman had stood absolutely still with legs
apart, arms hanging loosely, the dark eyes resting on Claud's face. Now he reached
one hand down into his shirt and pulled out the ferret; with the other he took out
the dead rat. There were traces of blood around the white muzzle of the ferret.
"Not sure I liked that very much."
"You never seen anythin' like it before, I'll bet you that."
"Can't really say I have."
"Like as not you'll get yourself a nasty little nip in the guts one of these
days," Claud told him. But he was clearly impressed, and the ratman was becoming
cocky again.
"Want to see somethin' far more amazn'n that?" he asked. "You want to see
somethin' you'd never even believe unless you seen it with your own eyes?"
"Well?"
We were standing in the driveway out in front of the pumps and it was one of
those pleasant warm November mornings. Two cars pulled in for petrol, one right
after the other, and Claud went over and gave them what they wanted.
"You want to see?" the ratman asked.
I glanced at Claud, slightly apprehensive. "Yes," Claud said. "Come on then,
let's see."
The ratman slipped the dead rat back into one pocket, the ferret into the
other. Then he reached down into his knapsack and produced--if you please--a
second live rat.
"Good Christ!" Claud said.
"Always got one or two rats about me somewhere," the man announced calmly.
"You got to know rats on this job, and if you want to know 'em you got to have 'em
round you. This is a sewer rat, this is. An old sewer rat, clever as buggery. See
him watchin' me all the time, wonderin' what I'm goin' to do? See him?"
"Very unpleasant."
"What are you going to do?" I asked. I had a feeling I was going to like
this one even less than the last.
"Fetch me a piece of string."
Claud fetched him a piece of string.
With his left hand, the man looped the string around one of the rat's hind
legs. The rat struggled, trying to turn its head to see what was going on, but he
held it tight around the neck with finger and thumb.
"Now!" he said, looking about him. "You got a table inside?"
"We don't want the rat inside the house," I said.
"Well--I need a table. Or somethin' flat like a table."
"What about the bonnet of that car?" Claud said.
We walked over to the car and the man put the old sewer rat on the bonnet.
He attached the string to the windshield wiper so that the rat was now tethered.
At first it crouched, unmoving and suspicious, a big-bodied grey rat with
bright black eyes and a scaly tail that lay in a long curl upon the car's bonnet.
It was looking away from the ratman, but watching him sideways to see what he was
going to do. The man stepped back a few paces and immediately the rat relaxed. It
sat up on its haunches and began to lick the grey fur on its chest. Then it
scratched its muzzle with both front paws. It seemed quite unconcerned about the
three men standing near by.
"Now--how about a little bet?" the ratman asked.
"We don't bet," I said.
"Just for fun. It's more fun if you bet."
"What d'you want to bet on?"
"I'll bet you I can kill that rat without usin' my hands. I'll put my hands
in my pockets and not use 'em."
"You'll kick it with your feet," Claud said.
It was apparent that the ratman was out to earn some money. I looked at the
rat that was going to be killed and began to feel slightly sick, not so much
because it was going to be killed but because it was going to be killed in a
special way, with a considerable degree of relish.
"No," the ratman said. "No feet."
"Nor arms?" Claud asked.
"Nor arms. Nor legs, nor hands neither."
"You'll sit on it."
"No. No squashin'."
"Let's see you do it."
"You bet me first. Bet me a quid."
"Don't be so bloody daft," Claud said. "Why should we give you a quid?"
"What'll you bet?"
"Nothin'."
"All right. Then it's no go."
He made as if to untie the string from the windshield wiper.
"I'll bet you a shilling," Claud told him. The sick gastric sensation in my
stomach was increasing, but there was an awful magnetism about this business and I
found myself quite unable to walk away or even move.
"You too?"
"No," I said.
"What's the matter with you?" the ratman asked.
"I just don't want to bet you, that's all."
"So you want me to do this for a lousy shillin'?"
"I don't want you to do it."
"Where's the money?" he said to Claud.
Claud put a shilling piece on the bonnet, near the radiator. The ratman
produced two sixpences and laid them beside Claud's money. As he stretched out his
hand to do this, the rat cringed, drawing its head back and flattening itself
against the bonnet.
"Bet's on," the ratman said.
Claud and I stepped back a few paces. The ratman stepped forward. He put his
hands in his pockets and inclined his body from the waist so that his face was on
a level with the rat, about three feet away.
His eyes caught the eyes of the rat and held them. The rat was crouching,
very tense, sensing extreme danger, but not yet frightened. The way it crouched,
it seemed to me it was preparing to spring forward at the man's face; but there
must have been some power in the ratman's eyes that prevented it from doing this,
and subdued it, and then gradually frightened it so that it began to back away,
dragging its body backwards with slow crouching steps until the string tautened on
its hind leg. It tried to struggle back further against the string, jerking its
leg to free it. The man leaned forward towards the rat, following it with his
face, watching it all the time with his eyes, and suddenly the rat panicked and
leaped sideways in the air. The string pulled it up with a jerk that must almost
have dislocated its leg.
It crouched again, in the middle of the bonnet, as far away as the string
would allow, and it was properly frightened now, whiskers quivering, the long grey
body tense with fear.
At this point, the ratman again began to move his face closer. Very slowly
he did it, so slowly there wasn't really any movement to be seen at all except
that the face just happened to be a fraction closer each time you looked. He never
took his eyes from the rat. The tension was considerable and I wanted suddenly to
cry out and tell him to stop. I wanted him to stop because it was making me feel
sick inside, but I couldn't bring myself to say the word. Something extremely
unpleasant was about to happen I was sure of that. Something sinister and cruel
and ratlike, and perhaps it really would make me sick. But I had to see it now.
The ratman's face was about eighteen inches from the rat. Twelve inches.
Then ten, or perhaps it was eight, and then there was not more than the length of
a man's hand separating their faces. The rat was pressing its body flat against
the car bonnet, tense and terrified. The ratman was also tense, but with a
dangerous active tensity that was like a tight-wound spring. The shadow of a smile
flickered around the skin of his mouth.
Then suddenly he struck.
He struck as a snake strikes, darting his head forward with one swift
knifelike stroke that originated in the muscles of the lower body, and I had a
momentary glimpse of his mouth opening very wide and two yellow teeth and the
whole face contorted by the effort of mouth-opening.
More than that I did not care to see. I closed my eyes, and when I opened
them again the rat was dead and the ratman was slipping the money into his pocket
and spitting to clear his mouth.
"That's what they makes lickerish out of," he said. "Rat's blood is what the
big factories and the chocolate-people use to make lickerish."
Again the relish, the wet-lipped, lip-smacking relish as he spoke the words,
the throaty richness of his voice and the thick syrupy way he pronounced the word
lickerish.
"No," he said, "there's nothin' wrong with a drop of rat's blood."
"Don't talk so absolutely disgusting," Claud told him.
"Ah! But that's it, you see. You eaten it many a time. Penny sticks and
lickerish bootlaces is all made from rat's blood."
"We don't want to hear about it, thank you."
"Boiled up, it is, in great cauldrons, bubblin' and steamin' and men
stirrin' it with long poles. That's one of the big secrets of the chocolate-makin'
factories, and no one knows about it--no one except the ratters supplyin' the
stuff."
Suddenly he noticed that his audience was no longer with him, that our faces
were hostile and sick-looking and crimson with anger and disgust. He stopped
abruptly, and without another word he turned and sloped off down the driveway out
on to the road, moving with the slow, that almost delicate ambling walk that was
like a rat prowling, making no noise with his footsteps even on the gravel of the
driveway.