The sun was up over the hills now and the mist had cleared and it was wonderful to
be striding along the road with the dog in the early morning, especially when it
was autumn, with the leaves changing to gold and yellow and sometimes one of them
breaking away and falling slowly, turning slowly over in the air, dropping
noiselessly right in front of him on to the grass beside the road. There was a
small wind up above, and he could hear the beeches rustling and murmuring like a
crowd of people.
This was always the best time of the day for Claud Cubbage. He gazed
approvingly at the rippling velvety hindquarters of the greyhound trotting in
front of him.
"Jackie," he called softly. "Hey, Jackson. How you feeling, boy?"
The dog half turned at the sound of its name and gave a quick acknowledging
wag of the tail.
There would never be another dog like this Jackie, he told himself. How
beautiful the slim streamlining, the small pointed head, the yellow eyes, the
black mobile nose. Beautiful the long neck, the way the deep brisket curved back
and up out of sight into no stomach at all. See how he walked upon his toes,
noiselessly, hardly touching the surface of the road at all.
"Jackson," he said. "Good old Jackson."
In the distance, Claud could see Rummins' farmhouse, small, narrow, and
ancient, standing back behind the hedge on the right-hand side.
I'll turn round there, he decided. That'll be enough for today.
Rummins, carrying a pail of milk across the yard, saw him coming down the
road. He set the pail down slowly and came forward to the gate, leaning both arms
on the topmost bar, waiting.
"Morning, Mr Rummins," Claud said. It was necessary to be polite to Rummins
because of eggs.
Rummins nodded and leaned over the gate, looking critically at the dog.
"Looks well," he said.
"He is well."
"When's he running?"
"I don't know, Mr Rummins."
"Come on. When's he running?"
"He's only ten months yet, Mr Rummins. He's not even schooled properly,
honest."
The small beady eyes of Rummins peered suspiciously over the top of the
gate. "I wouldn't mind betting a couple of quid you're having it off with him
somewhere secret soon."
Claud moved his feet uncomfortably on the black road surface. He disliked
very much this man with the wide frog mouth, the broken teeth, the shifty eyes;
and most of all he disliked having to be polite to him because of eggs.
"That hayrick of yours opposite," he said, searching desperately for another
subject. "It's full of rats."
"All hayricks got rats."
"Not like this one. Matter of fact we've been having a touch of trouble with
the authorities about that."
Rummins glanced up sharply. He didn't like trouble with the authorities. Any
man who sells eggs blackmarket and kills pigs without a permit is wise to avoid
contact with that sort of people.
"What kind of trouble?"
"They sent the ratcatcher along."
"You mean just for a few rats?"
"A few! Blimey, it's swarming!"
"Never."
"Honest it is, Mr Rummins. There's hundreds of 'em."
"Didn't the ratcatcher catch 'em?"
"No.
"Why?"
"I reckon they're too artful."
Rummins began thoughtfully to explore the inner rim of one nostril with the
end of his thumb, holding the noseflap between thumb and finger as he did so.
"I wouldn't give thank you for no ratcatchers," he said. "Ratcatchers is
government men working for the soddin' government and I wouldn't give thank you
for 'em."
"Nor me, Mr Rummins. All ratcatchers is slimy cunning creatures."
"Well," Rummins said, sliding fingers under his cap to scratch the head, "I
was coming over soon anyway to fetch in that rick. Reckon I might just as well do
it today as any other time. I don't want no government men nosing around my stuff
thank you very much."
"Exactly, Mr Rummins."
"We'll be over later--Bert and me." With that he turned and ambled off
across the yard.
Around three in the afternoon, Rummins and Bert were seen riding slowly up
the road in a cart drawn by a ponderous and magnificent black carthorse. Opposite
the filling-station the cart turned off into the field and stopped near the
hayrick.
"This ought to be worth seeing," I said. "Get the gun."
C laud fetched the rifle and slipped a cartridge into the breech.
I strolled across the road and leaned against the open gate. Rummins was on
the top of the rick now and cutting away at the cord that bound the thatching.
Bert remained in the cart, fingering the four-foot-long knife.
Bert had something wrong with one eye. It was pale grey all over, like a
boiled fish-eye, and although it was motionless in its socket it appeared always
to be looking at you and following you round the way the eyes of the people in
some of those portraits do, in the museums. Wherever you stood and wherever Bert
was looking, there was this faulty eye fixing you sideways with a cold stare,
boiled and misty pale with a little black dot in the centre, like a fish-eye on a
plate.
In his build he was the opposite of his father who was short and squat like
a frog. Bert was a tall, reedy, boneless boy, loose at the joints, even the head
loose upon the shoulders, falling sideways as though perhaps it was too heavy for
the neck.
"You only made this rick last June," I said to him. "Why take it away so
soon?
"Dad wants it."
"Funny time to cut a new rick, November."
"Dad wants it," Bert repeated, and both his eyes, the sound one and the
other stared down at me with a look of absolute vacuity.
"Going to all that trouble stacking it and thatching it and then pulling it
down five months later."
"Dad wants it." Bert's nose was running and he kept wiping it with the back
of his hand and wiping the back of the hand on his trousers.
"Come on, Bert," Rummins called, and the boy climbed up on to the rick and
stood in the place where the thatch had been removed. He took the knife and began
to cut down into the tight-packed hay with an easy-swinging, sawing movement,
holding the handle with both hands and rocking his body like a man sawing wood
with a big saw. I could hear the crisp cutting noise of the blade against the dry
hay and the noise becoming softer as the knife sank deeper into the rick.
"Claud's going to take a pot at the rats as they come out."
The man and the boy stopped abruptly and looked across the road at Claud who
was leaning against the red pump with rifle in hand.
"Tell him to put that bloody rifle away," Rummins said.
"He's a good shot. He won't hit you."
"No one's potting no rats alongside of me, don't matter how good they are."
"You'll insult him."
"Tell him to put it away," Rummins said, slow and hostile, "I don't mind
dogs nor sticks but I'll be buggered if I'll have rifles."
The two on the hayrick watched while Claud did as he was told, then they
resumed their work in silence. Soon Bert came down into the cart, and reaching out
with both hands he pulled a slice of solid hay away from the rick so that it
dropped neatly into the cart beside him.
A rat, grey-black, with a long tail, came out of the base of the rick and
ran into the hedge.
"A rat," I said.
"Kill it," Rummins said. "Why don't you get a stick and kill it?"
The alarm had been given now and the rats were coming out quicker, one or
two of them every minute, fat and long-bodied, crouching close to the ground as
they ran through the grass into the hedge. Whenever the horse saw one of them it
twitched its ears and followed it with uneasy rolling eyes.
Bert had climbed back on top of the rick and was cutting out another bale.
Watching him, I saw him suddenly stop, hesitate for perhaps a second, then again
begin to cut, but very cautiously this time, and now I could hear a different
sound, a muffled rasping noise as the blade of the knife grated against something
hard.
Bert pulled out the knife and examined the blade, testing it with his thumb.
He put it back, letting it down gingerly into the cut, feeling gently downward
until it came again upon the hard object; and once more, when he made another
cautious little sawing movement, there came that grating sound.
Rummins turned his head and looked over his shoulder at the boy. He was in
the act of lifting an armful of loosened thatch, bending forward with both hands
grasping the straw, but he stopped dead in the middle of what he was doing and
looked at Bert. Bert remained still, hands holding the handle of the knife, a look
of bewilderment on his face. Behind, the sky was a pale clear blue and the two
figures up there on the hayrick stood out sharp and black like an etching against
the paleness.
Then Rummins' voice, louder than usual, edged with an unmistakable
apprehension that the loudness did nothing to conceal: "Some of them haymakers is
too bloody careless what they put on a rick these days."
He paused, and again the silence, the men motionless, and across the road
Claud leaning motionless against the red pump. It was so quiet suddenly we could
hear a woman's voice far down the valley on the next farm calling the men to food.
Then Rummins again, shouting where there was no need to shout: "Go on, then!
Go on an' cut through it, Bert! A little stick of wood won't hurt the soddin'
knife!"
For some reason, as though perhaps scenting trouble, Claud came strolling
across the road and joined me leaning on the gate. He didn't say anything, but
both of us seemed to know that there was something disturbing about these two men,
about the stillness that surrounded them and especially about Rummins himself.
Rummins was frightened. Bert was frightened too. And now as I watched them, I
became conscious of a small vague image moving just below the surface of my
memory. I tried desperately to reach back and grasp it. Once I almost touched it,
but it slipped away and when I went after it I found myself travelling back and
back through many weeks, back into the yellow days of summer--the warm wind
blowing down the valley from the south, the big beech trees heavy with their
foliage, the fields turning 'to gold, the harvesting, the haymaking, the rick--the
building of the rick.
Instantly I felt a fine electricity of fear running over the skin of my
stomach.
Yes--the building of the rick. When was it we had built it? June? That was
it, of course a hot muggy day in June with the clouds low overhead and the air
thick with the smell of thunder.
And Rummins had said, "Let's for God's sake get it in quick before the rain
comes."
And Ole Jimmy had said, "There ain't going to be no rain. And there ain't no
hurry either. You know very well when thunder's in the south it don't cross over
into the valley."
Rummins, standing up in the cart handing out the pitch-forks, had not
answered him. He was in a furious brooding temper because of his anxiety about
getting in the hay before it rained.
"There ain't gin' to be no rain before evening," Ole Jimmy had repeated,
looking at Rummins; and Rummins had stared back at him, the eyes glimmering with a
slow anger.
All through the morning we had worked without a pause, loading the hay into
the cart, trundling it across the field, pitching it out on to the slowly growing
rick that stood over by the gate opposite the filling-station. We could hear the
thunder in the south as it came towards us and moved away again. Then it seemed to
return and remain stationary somewhere beyond the hills, rumbling intermittently.
When we looked up we could see the clouds overhead moving and changing shape in
the turbulence of the upper air, but on the ground it was hot and muggy and there
was no breath of wind. We worked slowly, listlessly in the heat, shirts wet with
sweat, faces shining.
Claud and I had worked beside Rummins on the rick itself, helping to shape
it, and I could remember how very hot it had been and the flies around my face and
the sweat pouring out everywhere; and especially I could remember the grim
scowling presence of Rummins beside me, working with a desperate urgency and
watching the sky and shouting at the men to hurry.
At noon, in spite of Rummins, we had knocked off for lunch.
Claud and I had sat down under the hedge with Ole Jimmy and another man
called Wilson who was a soldier home on leave, and it was too hot to do much
talking. Wilson had some bread and cheese and a canteen of cold tea. Ole Jimmy had
a satchel that was an old gas-mask container, and in this, closely packed,
standing upright with their necks protruding, were six pint bottles of beer.
"Come on," he said, offering a bottle to each of us.
"I'd like to buy one from you," Claud said, knowing very well the old man
had little money.
"Take it."
"I must pay you."
"Don't be so daft. Drink it."
He was a very good old man, good and clean, with a clean pink face that he
shaved each day. He had used to be a carpenter, but they retired him at the age of
seventy and that was some years before. Then the Village Council, seeing him still
active, had given him the job of looking after the newly built children's
playground, of maintaining the swings and see-saws in good repair and also of
acting as a kind of gentle watchdog, seeing that none of the kids hurt themselves
or did anything foolish.
That was a fine job for an old man to have and everybody seemed pleased with
the way things were going--until a certain Saturday night. That night Ole Jimmy
had got drunk and gone reeling and singing down the middle of the High Street with
such a howling noise that people got out of their beds to see what was going on
below. The next morning they had sacked him saying he was a waster and a drunkard
not fit to associate with young children on the playground.
But then an astonishing thing happened. The first day that he stayed away--a
Monday it was--not one single child came near the playground.
Nor the next day, nor the one after that.
All week the swings and the see-saws and the high slide with steps going up
to it stood deserted. Not a child went near them. Instead they followed Ole Jimmy
out into a field behind the Rectory and played their games there with him
watching; and the result of all this was that after a while the Council had had no
alternative but to give the old man back his job.
He still had it now and he still got drunk and no one said anything about it
any more. He left it only for a few days each year, at haymaking time. All his
life Ole Jimmy had loved to go haymaking and he wasn't going to give it up yet.
"You want one?" he asked now, holding a bottle out to Wilson, the soldier.
"No thanks. I got tea."
"They say tea's good on a hot day."
"It is. Beer makes me sleepy."
"If you like," I said to Ole Jimmy, "we could walk across to the fillingstation and I'll do you a couple of nice sandwiches? Would you like that?"
"Beer's plenty. There's more food in one bottle of beer, me lad, than twenty
sandwiches."
He smiled at me, showing two rows of palepink, toothless gums, but it was a
pleasant smile and there was nothing repulsive about the way the gums showed.
We sat for a while in silence. The soldier finished his bread and cheese and
lay back on the ground, tilting his hat forward over his face. Ole Jimmy had drunk
three bottles of beer, and now he offered the last to Claud and me.
"No thanks."
"No thanks. One's plenty for me."
The old man shrugged, unscrewed the stopper, tilted his head back and drank,
pouring the beer into his mouth with the lips held open so the liquid ran smoothly
without gurgling down his throat. He wore a hat that was of no colour at all and
of no shape, and it did not fall off when he tilted back his head.
"Ain't Rummins goin' to give that old horse a drink?" he asked, lowering the
bottle, looking across the field at the great carthorse that stood steaming
between the shafts of the cart.
"Not Rummins."
"Horses is thirsty, just the same as us." Ole Jimmy paused, still looking at
the horse. "You got a bucket of water in that place of yours there?"
"Of course."
"No reason why we shouldn't give the old horse a drink then, is there?"
"That's a very good idea. We'll give him a drink."
Claud and I both stood up and began walking towards the gate, and I remember
turning and calling to the old man: "You quite sure you wouldn't like me to bring
you a nice sandwich? Won't take a second to make."
He shook his head and waved the bottle at us and said something about taking
himself a little nap. We went on through the gate over the road to the filling
station.
I suppose we stayed away for about an hour attending to customers and
getting ourselves something to eat, and when at length we returned, Claud carrying
the bucket of water, I noticed that the rick was at least six foot high.
"Some water for the old horse," Claud said, looking hard at Rummins who was
up in the cart pitching hay on to the rick.
The horse put its head in the bucket, sucking and blowing gratefully at the
water.
"Where's Ole Jimmy?" I asked. We wanted the old man to see the water because
it had been his idea.
When I asked the question there was a moment, a brief moment, when RumminS
hesitated, pitchfork in mid-air, looking around him.
"I brought him a sandwich," I added. "Bloody old fool drunk too much beer
and gone off home to sleep," Rummins said.
I strolled along the hedge back to the place where we had been sitting with
Ole Jimmy. The five empty bottles were lying there in the grass. So was the
satchel. I picked up the satchel and carried it back to Rummins.
"I don't think Ole Jimmy's gone home, Mr Rummins," I said, holding up the
satchel by the long shoulder-band. Rummins glanced at it but made no reply. He was
in a frenzy of haste now because the thunder was closer, the clouds blacker, the
heat more oppressive than ever.
Carrying the satchel, I started back to the filling station where I remained
for the rest of the afternoon, serving customers. Towards evening, when the rain
came, I glanced across the road and noticed that they had got the hay in and were
laying a tarpaulin over the rick.
In a few days the thatcher arrived and took the tarpaulin off and made a
roof of straw instead. He was a good thatcher and he made a fine roof with long
straw, thick and well-packed. The slope was nicely angled, the edges cleanly
clipped, and it was a pleasure to look at it from the road or from the door of the
filling station.
All this came flooding back to me now as clearly as if it were yesterday--
the building of the rick on that hot thundery day in June, the yellow field, the
sweet woody smell of the hay; and Wilson the soldier, with tennis shoes on his
feet, Bert with the boiled eye, Ole Jimmy with the clean old face, the pink naked
gums; and Rummins, the broad dwarf, standing up in the cart scowling at the sky
because he was anxious about the rain.
At this very moment, there he was again, this Rummins, crouching on top of
the rick with a sheaf of thatch in his arms looking round at the son, the tall
Bert, motionless also, both of them black like silhouettes against the sky, and
once again I felt the fine electricity of fear as it came and went in little waves
over the skin of my stomach.
"Go on and cut through it, Bert," Rummins said, speaking loudly.
Bert put pressure on the big knife and there was a high grating noise as the
edge of the blade sawed across something hard. It was clear from Bert's face that
he did not like what he was doing.
It took several minutes before the knife was through--then again at last the
softer sound of the blade slicing the tight-packed hay and Bert's face turned
sideways to the father, grinning with relief, nodding inanely.
"Go on and cut it out," Rummins said, and still he did not move.
Bert made a second vertical cut the same depth as the first; then he got
down and pulled the bale of hay so it came away cleanly from the rest of the rick
like a chunk of cake, dropping into the cart at his feet.
Instantly the boy seemed to freeze, staring stupidly at the newly exposed
face of the rick, unable to believe or perhaps refusing to believe what this thing
was that he had cut in two. Rummins, who knew very well what it was, had turned
away and was climbing quickly down the other side of the rick. He moved so fast he
was through the gate and half-way across the road before Bert started to scream.