The sunlight dripped over the house like golden paint over an
art jar, and the freckling shadows here and there only
intensified the rigor of the bath of light. The Butterworth and
Larkin houses flanking were intrenched behind great stodgy
trees; only the Happer house took the full sun, and all day
long faced the dusty road-street with a tolerant kindly
patience. This was the city of Tarleton in southernmost
Georgia, September afternoon.
Up in her bedroom window Sally Carrol Happer rested her
nineteen-year-old chin on a fifty-two-year-old sill and watched
Clark Darrow's ancient Ford turn the corner. The car was hot-
- being partly metallic it retained all the heat it absorbed or
evolved -- and Clark Darrow sitting bolt upright at the wheel
wore a pained, strained expression as though he considered
himself a spare part, and rather likely to break. He laboriously
crossed two dust ruts, the wheels squeaking indignantly at
the encounter, and then with a terrifying expression he gave
the steering-gear a final wrench and deposited self and car
approximately in front of the Happer steps. There was a
plaintive heaving sound, a death-rattle, followed by a short
silence; and then the air was rent by a startling whistle.
Sally Carrol gazed down sleepily. She started to yawn, but
finding this quite impossible unless she raised her chin from
the window-sill, changed her mind and continued silently to
regard the car, whose owner sat brilliantly if perfunctorily at
attention as he waited for an answer to his signal. After a
moment the whistle once more split the dusty air.
"Good mawnin'."
With difficulty Clark twisted his tall body round and bent a
distorted glance on the window.
"'Tain't mawnin', Sally Carrol."
"Isn't it, sure enough?"
"What you do in'?"
"Eatin' 'n apple."
"Come on go swimmin'-- want to?"
"Reckon so."
"How 'bout hurryin' up?"
"Sure enough."
Sally Carrol sighed voluminously and raised herself with
profound inertia from the floor, where she had been occupied
in alternately destroying parts of a green apple and painting
paper tops for her younger sister. She approached a mirror,
regarded her expression with a pleassd and pleasant
languor, dabbed two spots of rouge on her lips and a grain of
powder on her nose, and covered her bobbed corn-colored
hair with a rose littered sun bonnet. Then she kicked over the
painting water, said, "Oh, damn!" -- but let it lay-- and left the
room.
"How you, Clark?" she inquired a minute later as she slipped
nimbly over the side of the car.
"Mighty fine, Sally Carrol."
"Where we go swimmin'?"
"Out to Walley's pool. Told Marylyn we'd call by an' get her
an' Joe Ewing."
Clark was dark and lean, and when on foot was rather
inclined to stoop. His eyes were ominous and his expression
somewhat petulant except when startlingly illuminated by one
of his frequent smiles. Clark had "a income"-- just enough to
keep himself in ease and his car in gasolene-- and he had
spent the two years since he graduated from Georgia Tech in
dozing round the lazy streets of his home town, discussing
how he could best invest his capital for an immediate fortune.
Hanging round he found not at all difficult; a crowd of little
girls had grown up beautifully, the amazing Sally Carrol
foremost among them; and they enjoyed being swum with
and danced with and made love to in the flower-filled
summery evenings -- and they all liked Clark immensely.
When feminine company palled there were half a dozen
other youths who were always just about to do something,
and meanwhile were quite willing to join him in a few holes of
golf, or a game of billiards, or the consumption of a quart of
"hard yella licker." Every once in a while one of these
contemporaries made a farewell round of calls before going
up to New York or Philadelphia or Pittsburgh to go into
business, but mostly they just stayed round in this languid
parade of dreamy skies and fireily evenings and noisy
niggery street fairs-- and especially of gracious, soft-voiced
girls, who were brought up on memories instead of money.
The Ford having been excited into a sort of restless resentful
life Clark and Sally Carrol rolled and rattled down Valley
Avenue into Jefferson Street, where the dust road became a
pavement; along opiate Millicent Place, where there were
half a dozen prosperous, substantial mansions; and on into
the down-town section. Driving was perilous here, for it was
shopping time; the population idled casually across the
streets and a drove of low-moaning oxen were being urged
along in front of a placid street-car; even the shops seemed
only yawning their doors and blinking their windows in the
sunshine before retiring into a state of utter and finite coma.
"Sally Carrol," said Clark suddenly, "it a fact that you're
engaged?"
She looked at him quickly.
"Where'd you hear that?"
"Sure enough, you engaged?" 

"'At's a nice question!"
"Girl told me you were engaged to a Yankee you met up in
Asheville last summer."
Sally Carrol sighed.
"Never saw such an old town for rumors."
"Don't marry a Yankee, Sally Carrol. We need you round
here."
Sally Carrol was silent a moment.
"Clark," she demanded suddenly, "who on earth shall I
marry?"
"I offer my services."
"Honey, you couldn't support a wife," she answered
cheerfully. "Anyway, I know you too well to fall in love with
you."
"'At doesn't mean you ought to marry a Yankee," he
persisted.
"S'pose I love him?"
He shook his head.
"You couldn't. He'd be a lot different from us, every way."
He broke off as he halted the car in front of a rambling,
dilapidated house. Marylyn Wade and Joe Ewing appeared in
the doorway.
"'Lo, Sally Carrol."
"Hi!"
"How you-all?"
" Sally Carrol," demanded Marylyn as they started off again,
"you engaged?"
"Lawdy, where'd all this start? Can't I look at a man 'thout
everybody in town engagin' me to him?"
Clark stared straight in front of him at a bolt on the clattering
wind-shield.
"Sally Carrol," he said with a curious intensity, "don't you like
us?"
"What?"
"Us down here?"
`Why, Clark, you know I do. I adore all you boys."
"Then why you gettin' engaged to a Yankee?"
"Clark, I don't know. I'm not sure what I'll do,
but-- well, I want to go places and see people. I want my
mind to grow. I want to live where things happen on a big
scale."
"What you mean?"
"Oh, Clark, I love you, and I love Joe here, and Ben Arrot,
and you-all, but you'll-- you'll-- -- "
"We'll all be failures?"
"Yes. I don't mean only money failures, but just sort of-- of
ineffectual and sad, and-- oh, how can I tell you?"
"You mean because we stay here in Tarleton?"
"Yes, Clark; and because you like it and never want to
change things or think or go ahead."
He nodded and she reached over and pressed his hand.
"Clark," she said softly, "I wouldn't change you for the world.
You're sweet the way you are. The things that'll make you fail
I'll love always-- the living in the past, the lazy days and
nights you have, and all your carelessness and generosity."
"But you're goin' away?"
"Yes-- because I couldn't ever marry you. You've a place in
my heart no one else ever could have, but tied down here I'd
get restless. I'd feel I was-- wastin' myself. There's two sides
to me, you see. There's the sleepy old side you love; an'
there's a sort of energy-- the feelin' that makes me do wild
things. That's the part of me that may be useful somewhere,
that'll last when I'm not beautiful any more."
She broke off with characteristic suddenness and sighed,
"Oh, sweet cooky!" as her mood changed.
Half closing her eyes and tipping back her head till it rested
on the seat-back she let the savory breeze fan her eyes and
ripple the fluffy curls of her bobbed hair. They were in the
country now, hurrying between tangled growths of brightgreen coppice and grass and tall trees that sent sprays of
foliage to hang a cool welcome over the road. Here and there
they passed a battered negro cabin, its oldest white-haired
inhabitant smoking a corncob pipe beside the door, and half
a dozen scantily clothed pickaninnies parading tattered dolls
on the wild-grown grass in front. Farther out were lazy cottonfields, where even the workers seemed intangible shadows
lent by the sun to the earth, not for toil, but to while away
some age-old tradition in the golden September fields. And
round the drowsy picturesqueness, over the trees and
shacks and muddy rivers, flowed the heat, never hostile, only
comforting, like a great warm nourishing bosom for the infant
earth.
"Sally Carrol, we're here!" "Poor chile's soun' asleep." 

"Honey, you dead at last out a sheer laziness?"
"Water, Sally Carrol! Cool water waitin' for you!"
Her eyes opened sleepily.
"Hi!" she murmured, smiling.
II
In November Harry Bellamy, tall, broad, and brisk, came
down from his Northern city to spend four days. His intention
was to settle a matter that had been hanging fire since he
and Sally Carrol had met in Asheville, North Carolina, in
midsummer. The settlement took only a quiet afternoon and
an evening in front of a glowing open fire, for Harry Bellamy
had everything she wanted; and, besides, she loved him--
loved him with that side of her she kept especially for loving.
Sally Carrol had several rather clearly defined sides.
On his last afternoon they walked, and she found their steps
tending half-unconsciously toward one of her favorite haunts,
the cemetery. When it came in sight, gray-white and goldengreen under the cheerful late sun, she paused, irresolute, by
the iron gate.
"Are you mournful by nature, Harry?" she asked with a faint
smile.
"Mournful? Not I."
"Then let's go in here. It depresses some folks, but I like it."
They passed through the gateway and followed a path that
led through a wavy valley of graves-- dusty-gray and mouldy
for the fifties; quaintly carved with flowers and jars for the
seventies; ornate and hideous for the nineties, with fat
marble cherubs lying in sodden sleep on stone pillows, and
great impossible growths of nameless granite flowers.
Occasionally they saw a kneeling figure with tributary flowers,
but over most of the graves lay silence and withered leaves
with only the fragrance that their own shadowy memories
could waken in living minds.
They reached the top of a hill where they were fronted by a
tall, round head-stone, freckled with dark spots of damp and
half grown over with vines.
"Margery Lee," she read; "-. Wasn't she nice? She
died when she was twenty-nine. Dear Margery Lee," she
added softly. "Can't you see her, Harry?"
"Yes, Sally Carrol."
He felt a little hand insert itself into his.
"She was dark, I think; and she always wore her hair with a
ribbon in it, and gorgeous hoop-skirts of alice blue and old
rose."
"Yes."
"Oh, she was sweet, Harry! And she was the sort of girl born
to stand on a wide, pillared porch and welcome folks in. I
think perhaps a lot of men went away to war meanin' to come
back to her; but maybe none of 'em ever did."
He stooped down close to the stone, hunting for any record
of marriage.
"There's nothing here to show."
"Of course not. How could there be anything there better
than just 'Margery Lee,' and that eloquent date?"
She drew close to him and an unexpected lump
came into his throat as her yellow hair brushed his cheek.
"You see how she was, don't you, Harry?"
"I see," he agreed gently. "I see through your precious eyes.
You're beautiful now, so I know she must have been."
Silent and close they stood, and he could feel her shoulders
trembling a little. An ambling breeze swept up the hill and
stirred the brim of her floppidy
hat.
"Let's go down there!"
She was pointing to a flat stretch on the other side of the hill
where along the green-turf were a thousand grayish-white
crosses stretching in endless, ordered rows like the stacked
arms of a battalion.
"Those are the Confederate dead," said Sally Carrol simply.
They walked along and read the inscriptions, always only a
name and a date, sometimes quite indecipherable.
"The last row is the saddest-- see, 'way over there. Every
cross has just a date on it, and the word `Unknown.'"
She looked at him and her eyes brimmed with tears.
"I can't tell you how real it is to me, darling-- if you don't
know."
"How you feel about it is beautiful to me."
"No, no, it's not me, it's them-- that old time that I've tried to
have live in me. These were just men, unimportant evidently
or they wouldn't have been `unknown'; but they died for the
most beautiful thing in the world-- the dead South. You see,"
she continued, her voice still husky, her eyes glistening with
tears, "people have these dreams they fasten onto things,
and I've always grown up with that dream. It was so easy
because it was all dead and there weren't any disillusions
comin' to me. I've tried in a way to live up to those past
standards of noblesse oblige-- there's just the last remnants
of it, you know, like the roses of an old garden dying all round 

us-- streaks of strange courtliness and chivalry in some of
these boys an' stories I used to hear from a Confederate
soldier who lived next door, and a few old darkies. Oh, Harry,
there was something, there was something! I couldn't ever
make you understand, but it was there."
"I understand," he assured her again quietly.
Sally Carrol smiled and dried her eyes on the tip of a
handkerchief protruding from his breast pocket.
"You don't feel depressed, do you, lover? Even when I cry I'm
happy here, and I get a sort of strength from it."
Hand in hand they turned and walked slowly away. Finding
soft grass she drew him down to a seat beside her with their
backs against the remnants of a low broken wall.
"Wish those three old women would clear out," he
complained. "I want to kiss you, Sally Carrol."
"Me, too."
They waited impatiently for the three bent figures to move off,
and then she kissed him until the sky seemed to fade out and
all her smiles and tears to vanish in an ecstasy of eternal
seconds.
Afterward they walked slowly back together, while on the
corners twilight played at somnolent black-and-white
checkers with the end of day.
"You'll be up about mid-January," he said, "and you've got to
stay a month at least. It'll be slick. There's a winter carnival
on, and if you've never really seen snow it'll be like fairy-land
to you. There'll be skating and skiing and tobogganing and
sleigh-riding, and all sorts of torchlight parades on snowshoes. They haven't had one for years, so they're going to
make it a knock-out."
"Will I be cold, Harry?" she asked suddenly.
"You certainly won't. You may freeze your nose, but you
won't be shivery cold. It's hard and dry, you know."
"I guess I'm a summer child. I don't like any cold I've ever
seen."
She broke off and they were both silent for a minute.
"Sally Carrol," he said very slowly, "what do you say to--
March?"
"I say I love you."
"March?"
"March, Harry."
III
All night in the Pullman it was very cold. She rang for the
porter to ask for another blanket, and when he couldn't give
her one she tried vainly, by squeezing down into the bottom
of her berth and doubling back the bedclothes, to snatch a
few hours' sleep. She wanted to look her best in the morning.
She rose at six and sliding uncomfortably into her clothes
stumbled up to the diner for a cup of coffee. The snow had
filtered into the vestibules and covered the floor with a
slippery coating. It was intriguing, this cold, it crept in
everywhere. Her breath was quite visible and she blew into
the air with a nave enjoyment. Seated in the diner she stared
out the window at white hills and valleys and scattered pines
whose every branch was a green platter for a cold feast of
snow. Sometimes a solitary farmhouse would fly by, ugly and
bleak and lone on the white waste; and with each one she
had an instant of chill compassion for the souls shut in there
waiting for spring.
As she left the diner and swayed back into the Pullman she
experienced a surging rush of energy and wondered if she
was feeling the bracing air of which Harry had spoken. This
was the North, the North-- her land now!
"Then blow, ye winds, heigho!
A-roving I will go,"
she chanted exultantly to herself.
"What's 'at?" inquired the porter politely.
"I said: `Brush me off.'"
The long wires of the telegraph-poles doubled; two tracks ran
up beside the train-- three-- four; came a succession of
white-roofed houses, a glimpse of a trolley-car with frosted
windows, streets-- more streets-- the city.
She stood for a dazed moment in the frosty station before
she saw three fur-bundled figures descending upon her.
"There she is!"
"Oh, Sally Carrol!"
Sally Carrol dropped her bag.
"Hi!"
A faintly familiar icy-cold face kissed her, and then she was in
a group of faces all apparently emitting great clouds of heavy
smoke; she was shaking hands. There were Gordon, a short,
eager man of thirty who looked like an amateur knockedabout model for Harry, and his wife, Myra, a listless lady with
flaxen hair under a fur automobile cap. Almost immediately
Sally Carrol thought of her as vaguely Scandinavian. A
cheerful chauffeur adopted her bag, and amid ricochets of
half-phrases, exclamations, and perfunctory listless "my
dears" from Myra, they swept each other from the station. 

Then they were in a sedan bound through a crooked
succession of snowy streets where dozens of little boys were
hitching sleds behind grocery wagons and automobiles.
"Oh," cried Sally Carrol, "I want to do that! Can we, Harry?"
"That's for kids. But we might-- -- "
"It looks like such a circus " she said regretfully.
Home was a rambling frame house set on a white lap of
snow, and there she met a big, gray-haired man of whom she
approved, and a lady who was like an egg, and who kissed
her-- these were Harry's parents. There was a breathless
indescribable hour crammed full of half-sentences, hot water,
bacon and eggs and confusion; and after that she was alone
with Harry in the library, asking him if she dared smoke.
It was a large room with a Madonna over the fireplace and
rows upon rows of books in covers of light gold and dark gold
and shiny red. All the chairs had little lace squares where
one's head should rest, the couch was just comfortable, the
books looked as if they had been read-- some-- and Sally
Carrol had an instantaneous vision of the battered old library
at home, with her father's huge medical books, and the oilpaintings of her three great-uncles, and the old couch that
had been mended up for forty-five years and was still
luxurious to dream in. This room struck her as being neither
attractive nor particularly otherwise. It was simply a room with
a lot of fairly expensive things in it that all looked about fifteen
years old.
"What do you think of it up here?" demanded Harry eagerly.
"Does it surprise you? Is it what you expected, I mean?"
"You are, Harry," she said quietly, and reached out her arms
to him.
But after a brief kiss he seemed anxious to extort enthusiasm
from her.
"The town, I mean. Do you like it? Can you feel the pep in the
air?"
"Oh, Harry," she laughed, "you'll have to give me time. You
can't just fling questions at me."
She puffed at her cigarette with a sigh of contentment.
"One thing I want to ask you," he began rather apologetically;
"you Southerners put quite an emphasis on family, and all
that-- not that it isn't quite all right, but you'll find it a little
different here. I mean-- you'll notice a lot of things that'll seem
to you sort of vulgar display at first, Sally Carrol; but just
remember that this is a three-generation town. Everybody
has a father, and about half of us have grandfathers. Back of
that we don't go."
"Of course," she murmured.
"Our grandfathers, you see, founded the place, and a lot of
them had to take some pretty queer jobs while they were
doing the founding. For instance, there's one woman who at
present is about the social model for the town; well, her
father was the first public ash man-- things like that."
"Why," said Sally Carrol, puzzled, "did you s'pose I was goin'
to make remarks about people?"
"Not at all," interrupted Harry; "and I'm not apologizing for
any one either. It's just that-- well, a Southern girl came up
here last summer and said some unfortunate things, and--
oh, I just thought I'd tell you."
Sally Carrol felt suddenly indignant-- as though she had been
unjustly spanked-- but Harry evidently considered the subject
closed, for he went on with a great surge of enthusiasm.
"It's carnival time, you know. First in ten years. And there's an
ice palace they're building now that's the first they've had
since eighty-five. Built out of blocks of the clearest ice they
could find-- on a tremendous scale."
She rose and walking to the window pushed aside the heavy
Turkish portires and looked out.
"Oh!" she cried suddenly. "There's two little boys makin' a
snow man! Harry, do you reckon I can go out an' help 'em?"
"You dream! Come here and kiss me."
She left the window rather reluctantly.
"I don't guess this is a very kissable climate, is it? I mean, it
makes you so you don't want to sit round, doesn't it?"
"We're not going to. I've got a vacation for the first week
you're here, and there's a dinner-dance to-night."
"Oh, Harry," she confessed, subsiding in a heap, half in his
lap, half in the pillows, "I sure do feel confused. I haven't got
an idea whether I'll like it or not, an' I don't know what people
expect, or anythin'. You'll have to tell me, honey."
"I'll tell you," he said softly, "if you'll just tell me you're glad to
be here."
"Glad-- just awful glad!" she whispered, insinuating herself
into his arms in her own peculiar way. "Where you are is
home for me, Harry."
And as she said this she had the feeling for almost the first
time in her life that she was acting a part.
That night, amid the gleaming candles of a dinner-party,
where the men seemed to do most of the talking while the
girls sat in a haughty and expensive aloofness, even Harry's
presence on her left failed to make her feel at home.
"They're a good-looking crowd, don't you think?" he
demanded. "Just look round. There's Spud Hubbard, tackle
at Princeton last year, and Junie Morton-- he and the redhaired fellow next to him were both Yale hockey captains; 

Junie was in my class. Why, the best athletes in the world
come from these States round here. This is a man's country,
I tell you. Look at John J. Fishburn!"
"Who's he?" asked Sally Carol innocently.
"Don't you know?"
"I've heard the name."
"Greatest wheat man in the Northwest, and one of the
greatest financiers in the country."
She turned suddenly to a voice on her right.
"I guess they forgot to introduce us. My name's Roger
Patton."
"My name is Sally Carol Happer," she said graciously.
"Yes, I know. Harry told me you were coming."
"You a relative?"
"No, I'm a professor."
"Oh," she laughed.
"At the university. You're from the South, aren't you?"
"Yes; Tarleton, Georgia."
She liked him immediately-- a reddish-brown mustache under
watery blue eyes that had something in them that these other
eyes lacked, some quality of appreciation. They exchanged
stray sentences through dinner, and she made up her mind
to see him again.
After coffee she was introduced to numerous good-looking
young men who danced with conscious precision and
seemed to take it for granted that she wanted to talk about
nothing except Harry.
"Heavens," she thought, "they talk as if my being engaged
made me older than they are-- as if I'd tell their mothers on
them!"
In the South an engaged girl, even a young married woman,
expected the same amount of half-affectionate badinage and
flattery that would be accorded a dbutante, but here all that
seemed banned. One young man, after getting well started
on the subject of Sally Carrol's eyes, and how they had
allured him ever since she entered the room, went into a
violent confusion when he found she was visiting the
Bellamys-- was Harry's fiance. He seemed to feel as though
he had made some risque and inexcusable blunder, became
immediately formal, and left her at the first opportunity.
She was rather glad when Roger Patton cut in on her and
suggested that they sit out a while.
"Well," he inquired, blinking cheerily, "how's Carmen from the
South?"
"Mighty fine. How's-- how's Dangerous Dan
McGrew? Sorry, but he's the only Northerner I know much
about."
He seemed to enjoy that.
"Of course," he confessed, "as a professor of literature I'm
not supposed to have read Dangerous Dan McGrew."
"Are you a native?"
"No, I'm a Philadelphian. Imported from Harvard to teach
French. But I've been here ten years."
"Nine years, three hundred and sixty-four days longer than
me."
"Like it here?"
"Uh-huh. Sure do!"
"Really?"
"Well, why not? Don't I look as if I were havin' a good time?"
"I saw you look out the window a minute ago-- and shiver."
"Just my imagination," laughed Sally Carrol. "I'm used to
havin' everythin' quiet outside, an' sometimes I look out an'
see a flurry of snow, an' it's just as if somethin' dead was
movin'."
He nodded appreciatively.
"Ever been North before?"
"Spent two Julys in Asheville, North Carolina."
"Nice-looking crowd, aren't they?" suggested Patton,
indicating the swirling floor.
Sally Carrol started. This had been Harry's remark.
"Sure are! They're-- canine."
"What?"
She flushed.
"I'm sorry; that sounded worse than I meant it. You see I
always think of people as feline or canine, irrespective of
sex."
"Which are you?" 

"I'm feline. So are you. So are most Southern men an' most
of these girls here."
"What's Harry?"
"Harry's canine distinctly. All the men I've met to-night seem
to be canine."
"What does `canine' imply? A certain conscious masculinity
as opposed to subtlety?"
"Reckon so. I never analyzed it-- only I just look at people an'
say `canine' or `feline' right off. It's right absurd, I guess."
"Not at all. I'm interested. I used to have a theory about these
people. I think they're freezing up."
"What?"
"I think they're growing like Swedes-- Ibsenesque, you know.
Very gradually getting gloomy and melancholy. It's these long
winters. Ever read any Ibsen?"
She shook her head.
"Well, you find in his characters a certain brooding rigidity.
They're righteous, narrow, and cheerless, without infinite
possibilities for great sorrow or joy."
"Without smiles or tears?"
"Exactly. That's my theory. You see there are thousands of
Swedes up here. They come, I imagine, because the climate
is very much like their own, and there's been a gradual
mingling. There're probably not half a dozen here to-night,
but-- we've had four Swedish governors. Am I boring you?'
"I'm mighty interested."
"Your future sister-in-law is half Swedish. Personally I like
her, but my theory is that Swedes react rather badly on us as
a whole. Scandinavians, you know, have the largest suicide
rate in the world."
"Why do you live here if it's so depressing?"
"Oh, it doesn't get me. I'm pretty well cloistered, and I
suppose, books mean more than people to me anyway."
"But writers all speak about the South being tragic. You
know-- Spanish seoritas, black hair and daggers an' haunting
music."
He shook his head.
"No, the Northern races are the tragic races-- they don't
indulge in the cheering luxury of tears."
Sally Carrol thought of her graveyard. She supposed that that
was vaguely what she had meant when she said it didn't
depress her.
"The Italians are about the gayest people in the world-- but
it's a dull subject," he broke off. "Anyway, I want to tell you
you're marrying a pretty fine man."
Sally Carrol was moved by an impulse of confidence.
"I know. I'm the sort of person who wants to be taken care of
after a certain point, and I feel sure I will be."
"Shall we dance? You know," he continued as they rose, "it's
encouraging to find a girl who knows what she's marrying for.
Nine-tenths of them think of it as a sort of walking into a
moving-picture sunset."
She laughed, and liked him immensely.
Two hours later on the way home she nestled near Harry in
the back seat.
"Oh, Harry," she whispered, "it's so co-old!"
"But it's warm in here, darling girl."
"But outside it's cold; and oh, that howling wind!"
She buried her face deep in his fur coat and trembled
involuntarily as his cold lips kissed the tip of her ear.
IV
The first week of her visit passed in a whirl. She had her
promised toboggan-ride at the back of an automobile through
a chill January twilight. Swathed in furs she put in a morning
tobogganing on the country-club hill; even tried skiing, to sail
through the air for a glorious moment and then land in a
tangled laughing bundle on a soft snowdrift. She liked all the
winter sports, except an afternoon spent snow-shoeing over
a glaring plain under pale yellow sunshine, but she soon
realized that these things were for children-- that she was
being humored and that the enjoyment round her was only a
reflection of her own.
At first the Bellamy family puzzled her. The men were reliable
and she liked them; to Mr. Bellamy especially, with his irongray hair and energetic dignity, she took an immediate fancy,
once she found that he was born in Kentucky; this made of
him a link between the old life and the new. But toward the
women she felt a definite hostility. Myra, her future sister-inlaw, seemed the essence of spiritless conventionality. Her
conversation was so utterly devoid of personality that Sally
Carrol, who came from a country where a certain amount of
charm and assurance could be taken for granted in the
women, was inclined to despise her.
"If those women aren't beautiful," she thought, "they're
nothing. They just fade out when you look at them. They're
glorified domestics. Men are the centre of every mixed
group." 

Lastly there was Mrs. Bellamy, whom Sally Carrol detested.
The first day's impression of an egg had been confirmed-- an
egg with a cracked, veiny voice and such an ungracious
dumpiness of carriage that Sally Carrol felt that if she once
fell she would surely scramble. In addition, Mrs. Bellamy
seemed to typify the town in being innately hostile to
strangers. She called Sally Carrol "Sally," and could not be
persuaded that the double name was anything more than a
tedious ridiculous nickname. To Sally Carrol this shortening
of her name was like presenting her to the public half clothed.
She loved "Sally Carrol"; she loathed "Sally." She knew also
that Harry's mother dispproved of her bobbed hair; and she
had never dared smoke down-stairs after that first day when
Mrs. Bellamy had come into the library sniffing violently.
Of all the men she met she preferred Roger Patton, who was
a frequent visitor at the house. He never again alluded to the
Ibsenesque tendency of the populace, but when he came in
one day and found her curled upon the sofa bent over "Peer
Gynt" he laughed and told her to forget what he'd said-- that
it was all rot.
And then one afternoon in her second week she and Harry
hovered on the edge of a dangerously steep quarrel. She
considered that he precipitated it entirely, though the Serbia
in the case was an unknown man who had not had his
trousers pressed.
They had been walking homeward between mounds of highpiled snow and under a sun which Sally Carrol scarcely
recognized. They passed a little girl done up in gray wool
until she resembled a small Teddy bear, and Sally Carrol
could not resist a gasp of maternal appreciation.
"Look! Harry!"
"What?"
"That little girl-- did you see her face?"
"Yes, why?"
"It was red as a little strawberry. Oh, she was cute!"
"Why, your own face is almost as red as that already!
Everybody's healthy here. We're out in
the cold as soon as we're old enough to walk. Wonderful
climate!"
She looked at him and had to agree. He was mighty healthylooking; so was his brother. And she had noticed the new red
in her own cheeks that very morning.
Suddenly their glances were caught and held, and they
stared for a moment at the street-corner ahead of them. A
man was standing there, his knees bent, his eyes gazing
upward with a tense expression as though he were about to
make a leap toward the chilly sky. And then they both
exploded into a shout of laughter, for coming closer they
discovered it had been a ludicrous momentary illusion
produced by the extreme bagginess of the man's trousers.
"Reckon that's one on us," she laughed.
"He must be a Southerner, judging by those trousers,"
suggested Earry mischievously.
"Why, Harry!"
Her surprised look must have irritated him.
"Those damn Southerners!"
Sally Carrol's eyes flashed.
"Don't call 'em that!"
"I'm sorry, dear," said Harry, malignantly apologetic, "but you
know what I think of them. They're sort of-- sort of
degenerates-- not at all like the old Southerners. They've
lived so long down there with all the colored people that
they've gotten lazy and shiftless."
"Hush your mouth, Harry!" she cried angrily.
"They're not! They may be lazy-- anybody would be in that
climate-- but they're my best friends, an' I don't want to hear
'em criticised in any such sweepin' way. Some of 'em are the
finest men in the world."
"Oh, I know. They're all right when they come North to
college, but of all the hangdog, ill-dressed, slovenly lot I ever
saw, a hunch of small-town Southerners are the worst!"
Sally Carrol was clinching her gloved hands and biting her lip
furiously.
"Why," continued Harry, "there was one in my class at New
Haven, and we all thought that at last we'd found the true
type of Southern aristocrat, but it turned out that he wasn't an
aristocrat at all -- just the son of a Northern carpetbagger,
who owned about all the cotton round Mobile."
"A Southerner wouldn't talk the way you're talking now," she
said evenly.
"They haven't the energy!"
"Or the somethin' else."
"I'm sorry, Sally Carrol, but I've heard you say yourself that
you'd never marry-- -- "
"That's quite different. I told you I wouldn't want to tie my life
to any of the boys that are round Tarleton now, but I never
made any sweepin' generalities."
They walked along in silence.
"I probably spread it on a bit thick, Sally Carrol. I'm sorry." 

She nodded but made no answer. Five minutes later as they
stood in the hallway she suddenly threw her arms round him.
"Oh, Harry," she cried, her eyes brimming with tears, "let's
get married next week. I'm afraid of having fusses like that.
I'm afraid, Harry. It wouldn't be that way if we were married."
But Harry, being in the wrong, was still irritated.
"That'd be idiotic. We decided on March."
The tears in Sally Carrol's eyes faded; her expression
hardened slightly.
"Very well-- I suppose I shouldn't have said that."
Harry melted.
"Dear little nut!" he cried. "Come and kiss me and let's
forget."
That very night at the end of a vaudeville performance the
orchestra played "Dixie" and Sally Carrol felt something
stronger and more enduring than her tears and smiles of the
day brim up inside her. She leaned forward gripping the arms
of her chair until her face grew crimson.
"Sort of get you, dear?" whispered Harry.
But she did not hear him. To the spirited throb of the violins
and the inspiring beat of the kettledrums her own old ghosts
were marching by and on into the darkness, and as fifes
whistled and sighed in the low encore they seemed so nearly
out of sight that she could have waved good-by.
"Away, Away,
Away down South in Dixie!
Away, away,
Away down South in Dixie!"
V
It was a particularly cold night. A sudden thaw had nearly
cleared the streets the day before, but now they were
traversed again with a powdery wraith of loose snow that
travelled in wavy lines before the feet of the wind, and filled
the lower air with a fine-particled mist. There was no sky--
only a dark, ominous tent that draped in the tops of the
streets and was in reality a vast approaching army of
snowflakes-- while over it all, chilling away the comfort from
the brown-and-green glow of lighted windows and muffling
the steady trot of the horse pulling their sleigh, interminably
washed the north wind. It was a dismal town after all, she
thought-- dismal.
Sometimes at night it had seemed to her as though no one
lived here-- they had all gone long ago-- leaving lighted
houses to be covered in time by tombing heaps of sleet. Oh,
if there should be snow on her grave! To be beneath great
piles of it all winter long, where even her headstone would be
a light shadow against light shadows. Her grave-- a grave
that should be flower-strewn and washed with sun and rain.
She thought again of those isolated country houses that her
train had passed, and of the life there the long winter
through-- the ceaseless glare through the windows, the crust
forming on the soft drifts of snow, finally the slow, cheerless
melting, and the harsh spring of which Roger Patton had told
her. Her spring-- to lose it forever-- with its lilacs and the lazy
sweetness it stirred in her heart. She was laying away that
spring-- afterward she would lay away that sweetness.
With a gradual insistence the storm broke. Sally Carrol felt a
film of flakes melt quickly on her eyelashes, and Harry
reached over a furry arm and drew down her complicated
flannel cap. Then the small flakes came in skirmish-line, and
the horse bent his neck patiently as a transparency of white
appeared momentarily on his coat.
"Oh, he's cold, Harry," she said quickly.
"Who? The horse? Oh, no, he isn't. He likes it!"
After another ten minutes they turned a corner and came in
sight of their destination. On a tall hill outlined in vivid glaring
green against the wintry sky stood the ice palace. It was
three stories in the air, with battlements and embrasures and
narrow icicled windows, and the innumerable electric lights
inside made a gorgeous transparency of the great central
hall. Sally Carrol clutched Harry's hand under the fur robe.
"It's beautiful!" he cried excitedly. "My golly, it's beautiful, isn't
it! They haven't had one here since eighty-five!"
Somehow the notion of there not having been one since
eighty-five oppressed her. Ice was a ghost, and this mansion
of it was surely peopled by those shades of the eighties, with
pale faces and blurred snow-filled hair.
"Come on, dear," said Harry.
She followed him out of the sleigh and waited while he
hitched the horse. A party of four-- Gordon, Myra, Roger
Patton, and another girl-- drew up beside them with a mighty
jingle of bells. There were quite a crowd already, bundled in
fur or sheepskin, shouting and calling to each other as they
moved through the snow, which was now so thick that people
could scarcely be distinguished a few yards away.
"It's a hundred and seventy feet tall," Harry was saying to a
muffled figure beside him as they trudged toward the
entrance; "covers six thousand square yards."
She caught snatches of conversation: "One main hall"--
"walls twenty to forty inches thick"-- "and the ice cave has
almost a mile of-- "-- "this Canuck who built it-- -- "
They found their way inside, and dazed by the magic of the
great crystal walls Sally Carrol found herself repeating over
and over two lines from "Kubla Khan": 

"It was a miracle of rare device,
A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!"
In the great glittering cavern with the dark shut out she took a
seat on a wooden bench, and the evening's oppression lifted.
Harry was right-- it was beautiful; and her gaze travelled the
smooth surface of the walls, the blocks for which had been
selected for their purity and clearness to obtain this
opalescent, translucent effect.
"Look! Here we go-- oh, boy!" cried Harry.
A band in a far corner struck up "Hail, Hail, the Gang's All
Here!" which echoed over to them in wild muddled acoustics,
and then the lights suddenly went out; silence seemed to flow
down the icy sides and sweep over them. Sally Carrol could
still see her white breath in the darkness, and a dim row of
pale faces over on the other side.
The music eased to a sighing complaint, and from outside
drifted in the full-throated resonant chant of the marching
clubs. It grew louder like some pan of a viking tribe traversing
an ancient wild; it swelled-- they were coming nearer; then a
row of torches appeared, and another and another, and
keeping time with their moccasined feet a long column of
gray-mackinawed figures swept in, snowshoes slung at their
shoulders, torches soaring and flickering as their voices rose
along the great walls.
The gray column ended and another followed, the light
streaming luridly this time over red toboggan caps and
flaming crimson mackinaws, and as they entered they took
up the refrain; then came a long platoon of blue and white, of
green, of white, of brown and yellow.
"Those white ones are the Wacouta Club," whispered Harry
eagerly. "Those are the men you've met round at dances."
The volume of the voices grew; the great cavern was a
phantasmagoria of torches waving in great banks of fire, of
colors and the rhythm of soft-leather steps. The leading
column turned and halted, platoon deployed in front of
platoon until the whole procession made a solid flag of flame,
and then from thousands of voices burst a mighty shout that
filled the air like a crash of thunder, and sent the torches
wavering. It was magnificent, it was tremendous! To Sally
Carrol it was the North offering sacrifice on some mighty altar
to the gray pagan God of Snow. As the shout died the band
struck up again and there came more singing, and then long
reverberating cheers by each club. She sat very quiet
listening while the staccato cries rent the stillness; and then
she started, for there was a volley of explosion, and great
clouds of smoke went up here and there through the cavern--
the flash-light photographers at work-- and the council was
over. With the band at their head the clubs formed in column
once more, took up their chant, and began to march out.
"Come on!" shouted Harry. "We want to see the labyrinths
down-stairs before they turn the lights off!"
They all rose and started toward the chute-- Harry and Sally
Carrol in the lead, her little mitten buried in his big fur gantlet.
At the bottom of the chute was a long empty room of ice, with
the ceiling so low that they had to stoop-- and their hands
were parted. Before she realized what he intended Harry had
darted down one of the half-dozen glittering passages that
opened into the room and was only a vague receding blot
against the green shimmer.
"Harry!" she called.
"Come on!" he cried back.
She looked round the empty chamber; the rest of the party
had evidently decided to go home, were already outside
somewhere in the blundering snow. She hesitated and then
darted in after Harry.
"Harry!" she shouted.
She had reached a turning-point thirty feet down; she heard a
faint muffled answer far to the left, and with a touch of panic
fled toward it. She passed another turning, two more yawning
alleys.
"Harry!"
No answer. She started to run straight forward, and then
turned like lightning and sped back the way she had come,
enveloped in a sudden icy terror.
She reached a turn-- was it here?-- took the left and came to
what should have been the outlet into the long, low room, but
it was only another glittering passage with darkness at the
end. She called again, but the walls gave back a flat, lifeless
echo with no reverberations. Retracing her steps she turned
another corner, this time following a wide passage. It was like
the green lane between the parted waters of the Red Sea,
like a damp vault connecting empty tombs.
She slipped a little now as she walked, for ice had formed on
the bottom of her overshoes; she had to run her gloves along
the half-slippery, half-sticky walls to keep her balance.
"Harry!"
Still no answer. The sound she made bounced mockingly
down to the end of the passage.
Then on an instant the lights went out, and she was in
complete darkness. She gave a small, frightened cry, and
sank down into a cold little heap on the ice. She felt her left
knee do something as she fell, but she scarcely noticed it as
some deep terror far greater than any fear of being lost
settled upon her. She was alone with this presence that
came out of the North, the dreary loneliness that rose from
ice-bound whalers in the Arctic seas, from smokeless,
trackless wastes where were strewn the whitened bones of
adventure. It was an icy breath of death; it was rolling down
low across the land to clutch at her.
With a furious, despairing energy she rose again and started
blindly down the darkness. She must get out. She might be
lost in here for days, freeze to death and lie embedded in the
ice like corpses she had read of, kept perfectly preserved 

until the melting of a glacier. Harry probably thought she had
left with the others-- he had gone by now; no one would know
until late next day. She reached pitifully for the wall. Forty
inches thick, they had said-- forty inches thick!
"Oh!"
On both sides of her along the walls she felt things creeping,
damp souls that haunted this palace, this town, this North.
"Oh, send somebody-- send somebody!" she cried aloud.
Clark Darrow-- he would understand; or Joe Ewing; she
couldn't be left here to wander forever -- to be frozen, heart,
body, and soul. This her-- this Sally Carrol! Why, she was a
happy thing. She was a happy little girl. She liked warmth
and summer and Dixie. These things were foreign-- foreign.
"You're not crying," something said aloud.
"You'll never cry any more. Your tears would just freeze; all
tears freeze up here!"
She sprawled full length on the ice.
"Oh, God!" she faltered.
A long single file of minutes went by, and with a great
weariness she felt her eyes closing. Then some one seemed
to sit down near here and take her face in warm, soft hands.
She looked up gratefully.
"Why, it's Margery Lee," she crooned softly to herself. "I
knew you'd come." It really was Margery Lee, and she was
just as Sally Carrol had known she would be, with a young,
white brow, and wide, welcoming eyes, and a hoop-skirt of
some soft material that was quite comforting to rest on.
"Margery Lee."
It was getting darker now and darker-- all those tombstones
ought to be repainted, sure enough, only that would spoil
'em, of course. Still, you ought to be able to see 'em.
Then after a succession of moments that went fast and then
slow, but seemed to be ultimately resolving themselves into a
multitude of blurred rays converging toward a pale-yellow
sun, she heard a great cracking noise break her new-found
stillness.
It was the sun, it was a light; a torch, and a torch beyond that,
and another one, and voices; a face took flesh below the
torch, heavy arms raised her, and she felt something on her
cheek-- it felt wet. Some one had seized her and was rubbing
her face with snow. How ridiculous-- with snow!
"Sally Carrol! Sally Carrol!
It was Dangerous Dan McGrew; and two other faces she
didn't know.
"Child, child! We've been looking for you two hours! Harry's
half-crazy!"
Things came rushing back into place-- the singing, the
torches, the great shout of the marching clubs. She squirmed
in Patton's arms and gave a long low cry.
"Oh, I want to get out of here! I'm going back home. Take me
home"-- her voice rose to a scream that sent a chill to Harry's
heart as he came racing down the next passage-- "tomorrow!" she cried with delirious, unrestrained passion-- "Tomorrow! To-morrow! To-morrow!"
VI
The wealth of golden sunlight poured a quite enervating yet
oddly comforting heat over the house where day long it faced
the dusty stretch of road. Two birds were making a great todo in a cool spot found among the branches of a tree next
door, and down the street a colored woman was announcing
herself melodiously as a purveyor of strawberries. It was April
afternoon.
Sally Carrol Happer, resting her chin on her arm, and her arm
on an old window-seat, gazed sleepily down over the
spangled dust whence the heat waves were rising for the first
time this spring. She was watching a very ancient Ford turn a
perilous corner and rattle and groan to a jolting stop at the
end of the walls. She made no sound, and in a minute a
strident familiar whistle rent the air. Sally Carrol smiled and
blinked.
"Good mawnin'."
A head appeared tortuously from under the cartop below.
"'Tain't mawnin'."
"Sure enough!" she said in affected surprise. "I guess maybe
not."
"What you doin'?"
"Eatin' green peach. 'Spect to die any minute."
Clark twisted himself a last impossible notch to get a view of
her face.
"Water's warm as a kettla steam, Sally Carrol. Wanta go
swimmin'?"
"Hate to move," sighed Sally Carrol lazily, "but I reckon so."