Neither the haves nor the have-nots showed much interest when Ignatius Agarbi was appointed as Nigeria’s Minister of Finance. After all, the cynics pointed out, he was the seventeenth person to hold the office in seventeen years.

In Ignatius’ first major policy statement to Parliament he appealed to his fellow contrymen to tighten their belts in the face of economic problems and promised to end graft and corruption in public life and warned the electorate that no one holding an official position could feel safe unless he led a blameless life. He ended his maiden speech with the words, “I am disposed to clear out Nigeria’s Augean stables.”

Such was the impact of the minister’s speech that it failed to get a mention in the Lagos Times. Perhaps the editor considered that, since the paper had covered the Speeches of the previous sixteen ministers in extenso, his readers might feel they had heard it all before. Ignatius, however, was not to be disheartened by the lack of confidence shown in him, and set about his new task with vigor and determination. Within days of his appointment he had caused a minor official at the Ministry of Food to be jailed for falsifying documents relating to the import of grain. The next to feel the bristles of Ignatius’ new broom was a leading Lebanese financier, who was deported without trial for breach of the exchange control regulations. A month later came an event which even Ignatius considered a personal coup: the arrest of the Chief of Police for accepting bribes – a perk the citizens of Lagos had in the past considered went with the job. When four months later the Police Chief was sentenced to eighteen months in jail, the new Finance Minister finally made the front page of the Lagos Times. A leader on the center page dubbed him “Clean Sweep Ignatius”, the new broom every guilty man feared. Ignatius was gaining enviable reputation as Mr. Clean as arrest followed arrest and unfounded rumours began circulating in the capital that even General Otobi, the Head of State, was under investigation by his own Finance Minister.

Ignatius alone now checked, vetoed and authorized all foreign contracts worth over one hundred million dollars, making sure that the country was cutting the cloth according to its means. It wouldn’t be far-fetched to say that he was the one to hold the purse strings. And although every decision he made was meticulously scrutinized by his enemies, not a breath of scandal ever became associated with his name. When Ignatius began his second year of office as Minister of Finance even the cynics began to acknowledge his achievements. It was about this time that General Otobi felt confident enough to call Ignatius in for an unscheduled consultation.

“Ignatius, I have just finished going over the latest budget report and I am alarmed by your conclusion now that most of the country is living from hand to mouth, the Exchequer is still losing millions of dollars each year in bribes paid to go-betweens by foreign companies. But have you any idea into whose pockets this money is falling? That’s what I want to know.” 

Ignatius sat bolt upright, his eyes never leaving the Head of State.

“I suspect a great percentage of the money is ending up in private Swiss bank accounts but I am at present unable to prove it.”

“Then I will give you whatever added authority you require to do so,” said General Otobi. “You can use any means you consider necessary to ferret out these villains. Start by investigating every member of my Cabinet, past and present. And show no fear or favor in your endeavors, no
matter what their rank or connections.”

“For such a task to have any chance of success I would need a special letter of authority signed by you, General…and the rank of Ambassador Plenipotentiary whenever I travel abroad.”

“Granted.”

“Thank you,” said Ignatius, rising from his own chair on the assumption that the audience was over.

“You may also need this,” said the General as they walked toward the door. The Head of State
handed Ignatius a small automatic pistol. “Because I suspect by now that you have almost as many
enemies as I do.”
Ignatius took the pistol from the soldier awkwardly, put it in his pocket and mumbled his
thanks.
Without the knowledge of the chairman of the State Bank in Nigeria and unhindered by any
senior civil servants, Ignatius enthusiastically set about his new task. He researched alone at night,
and by day discussed his findings with no one. Three months later he was ready to pounce. The
Minister selected the month of August to make an unscheduled visit abroad as it was the time
when most Nigerians went on holiday and his absence would therefore not be worthy of comment.
He asked his permanent secretary to book him, his wife and their two children on a flight to
Orlando, and to be certain that it was charged to his personal account.
On the arrival the family checked into the local Marriot Hotel. He then informed his wife,
without warning or explanation, that he would be spending a few days in New York on business
before rejoining them for the rest of the holiday. The following morning Ignatius left his family to
the mysteries of Disney World while he took a flight to New York. It was a short taxi ride from La
Guardia to Kennedy, where, after a change of clothes and the purchase of a return tourist ticket for
a cash, Ignatius boarded a Swissair flight for Geneva unobserved.
Once in the Swiss financial capital Ignatius, either reluctant to pay through the nose for his
accommodation or willing to avoid publicity, booked into an inconspicuous hotel, retired to bed
and slept soundly for eight hours. Over breakfast the following morning he studied the list of banks
he had so carefully drawn up after completing his research in Nigeria: each name was written out
boldly in his own hand. Ignatius decided to start with Gerber et Cie whose building, he observed
from the hotel bedroom, took up half the Avenue de Parchine. He checked the telephone number
with the concierge before placing a call. The chairman agreed to see the Minister at twelve
o’clock.
Carrying only a battered briefcase, Ignatius arrived at the bank a few minutes before the
appointed hour. An unusual occurrence for a Nigerian, thought the young man dressed in a smart
grey suit, white shirt and grey silk tie, who was waiting in the marble hall to greet him.
He bowed to the Minister, introducing himself as the chairman’s personal assistant, and
explained that he would accompany Ignatius to the chairman’s office. The young executive led the
Minister to a waiting lift and neither man uttered another word until they had reached the eleventh
floor. A gentle tap on the chairman’s door elicited “Entrez,” which the young man obeyed.
The chairman rose from behind his desk and stepped forward to greet his guest. Ignatius could
not help noticing that he too wore a grey suit, white shirt and grey silk tie.
“Good morning, Minister,” the chairman said. “Won’t you have a seat?” He ushered Ignatius
toward a low glass table surrounded by comfortable chairs on the far side of the room. “I have
ordered coffee for both of us if that is acceptable.”
Ignatius nodded, placed the battered briefcase on the floor by the side of his chair and stared
out of the large plate-glass window. He made some small talk about the splendid view of the
magnificent fountain while a girl served all three men with coffee.
Once the young woman had left the room Ignatius got down to business.
“My Head of State has requested that I visit your bank with a rather unusual request,” he
began. Not a flicker of surprise appeared on the face of the chairman or his young assistant. “He
has honored me with the task of discovering which Nigerian citizens hold numbered accounts with
your bank.”
On learning this piece of information only the chairman’s lips moved. “I am not at liberty to
disclose –”
“Allow me to put my case,” said the Minister, raising a white palm. “First, let me assure you
that I come with the absolute authority of my government.” Without another word, Ignatius
extracted an envelope from his inside pocket with a flourish. He handed it to the chairman who
removed the letter inside and read it slowly.
Once he had finished reading, the banker cleared his throat. “This document, I fear, sir, carries
no validity in my country. I am, of course,” continued the chairman, “not for one moment doubting
that you have the full backing of your Head of State, as both a Minister and an Ambassador, but
that does not change the bank’s rule of confidentiality in such matters. There are no circumstances
in which we would release the names of any of our account holders without their authority. I’m
sorry to be of so little help, but those are, and will always remain, the bank rules.” The chairman
rose to his feet, as he considered the meeting was now at an end; but he had not bargained for
Clean Sweep Ignatius.
“My Head of State,” said Ignatius, softening his tone perceptibly, “has authorized me to
approach your bank as the intermediary for all future transactions between my country and
Switzerland.”
“We are flattered by your confidence in us, Minister,” replied the chairman, who remained
standing. “However, You cam hardly think that it can alter our attitude to our customer’s
confidentiality.”
Ignatius remained unperturbed.
“Then I am sorry to inform you, Mr. Gerber, that our Ambassador in Bern will be instructed to
make an official communiqué to the Swiss Foreign Office about the lack of cooperation your bank
has shown concerning requests for information about our nationals.” He waited for his words to
sink in. “You could avoid such embarrassment, of course, by simply letting me know the names of
my countrymen who hold accounts with Gerber et Cie and the amounts involved. I can assure you
we would not reveal the source of our information.”
“You are most welcome to lodge such a communiqué, sir, and I feel sure that our Minister will
explain to your Ambassador in the most courteous of diplomatic terms that it is just impossible to
demand such disclosures.”
“If that is the case, I shall instruct my own Ministry of Trade to halt all future dealings in
Nigeria with any Swiss nationals until these names are revealed.”
“That is your privilege, Minister,” replied the chairman, unmoved.
“And we may also have to reconsider every contract currently being negotiated by your
countrymen in Nigeria. And in addition I shall personally see to it that no penalty clauses are
honored.”
“Would you not consider such action a little precipitate?”
“Let me assure you, Mr. Gerber, that I would not lose one moment of sleep over such a
decision,” said Ignatius. “Even if my efforts to discover those names were to bring your company
to its knees I would not be moved.”
“So be it, Minister,” replied the chairman. “However, it still does not alter the policy or the
attitude of this bank to confidentiality.”
“If that remains the case, sir, this very day I shall provide our Ambassador with the instruction
to close our Embassy in Bern and I shall declare your Ambassador in Lagos persona non grata.”
For the first time the chairman raised his eyebrows.
“Furthermore,” continued Ignatius, “I will hold a conference in London which will leave the
world’s press in no doubt of my Head of State’s displeasure with the conduct of this bank. After
such publicity I am sure some of your clients will close their accounts, while others who have in
the past considered you a safe heaven may find it necessary to look elsewhere.”
The Minister waited but still the chairman did not respond.
“Then you leave me no choice,” said Ignatius, rising from his seat.
The chairman stretched out his hand, assuming that at last the Minister was leaving, only to
watch with horror as Ignatius placed a hand in his jacket pocket and removed a small pistol. The
two Swiss bankers froze as the Nigerian Minister of Finance stepped forward and pressed the
muzzle against the chairman’s temple.
“I need those names, Mr. Gerber, and by now you must realize I will stop at nothing. If you
don’t supply them immediately I’m going to blow your brains out. Do you understand?”
The chairman gave a slight nod, beads of sweat appearing on his forehead. “And he will be
next,” said Ignatius, gesturing toward the young assistant, who stood speechless and paralyzed a
few paces away.
“Get me the names of every Nigerian who holds an account in this bank,” Ignatius said quietly,
looking toward the young man, “or I’ll blow your chairman’s brains all over his soft carpet.
Immediately, do you hear me?” Ignatius added sharply.
The young man looked toward the chairman, who was now trembling but said quite clearly,
“Non, Pierre, jamais.”
“D’accord,” replied the assistant in a whisper.
“You can’t say I didn’t give you every chance,” Ignatius pulled back the hammer. The sweat
was now pouring down the chairman’s face and the young man had to
turn his eyes away as he waited in terror for the pistol shot.
“Excellent,” said Ignatius, as he removed the gun from the
chairman’s head and returned to his seat. Both bankers were still
trembling and quite unable to speak.
The Minister picked up the battered briefcase by the side of his
chair and placed it on the glass table in front of him. He pressed back
the clasps and the lid flicked up.
The two bankers stared down at the neatly packed rows of hundreddollar bills. Every inch of the briefcase had been taken up. The
chairman quickly estimated that it probably amounted to around five
million dollars.
“I wonder, sir,” said Ignatius, “how I go about opening an account with your bank?”