Mrs. Cross and Mrs. Kidd have known each other eighty years, ever since Kindergarten, which was not called that then, but Primary. Mrs. Cross’s first picture of Mrs. Kidd is of her standing at the front of the class reciting some poem, her hands behind her back and her small black-eyed face lifted to let out her self-confident voice. Over the next ten years, if you went to any concert, any meeting that featured entertainment, you would find Mrs. Kidd (who was not called Mrs. Kidd then but Marian Botherton), with her dark, thick bangs cut straight across her forehead, and her pinafore sticking up in starched wings, reciting a poem with the greatest competence and no hitch of memory. Even today with hardly any excuse, sitting in her wheelchair, Mrs. Kidd will launch forth.

“Today we French stormed Ratisbon,”

she will say, or:

“Where are the ships I used to know

That came to port on the Fundy tide?”

She stops not because she doesn’t remember how to go on but in order to let somebody say, “What’s that one?” or, “Wasn’t that in the Third Reader?” which she takes as a request to steam ahead.

“Half a century ago

In beauty and stately pride.”

Mrs. Kidd’s first memory of Mrs. Cross (Dolly Grainger) is of a broad red face and a dress with a droopy hem, and thick fair braids, and a bellowing voice, in the playground on a rainy day when they were all crowded under the overhang. The girls played a game that was really a dance, that Mrs. Kidd did not know how to do. It was a Virginia reel and the words they sang were:

“Jolting up and down in the old Brass Wagon

Jolting up and down in the old Brass Wagon

Jolting up and down in the old Brass Wagon

You’re the One my Darling!”

Nobody whirled and stomped and sang more enthusiastically than Mrs. Cross, who was the youngest and smallest allowed to play. She knew it from her older sisters. Mrs. Kidd was an only child.

Younger people, learning that these two women have known each other for more than three-quarters of a century, seem to imagine this gives them everything in common. They themselves are the only ones who can recall what separated them, and to a certain extent does yet: the apartment over the Post Office and Customs house, where Mrs. Kidd lived with her mother and her father who was the Postmaster; the row-house on Newgate Street where Mrs. Cross lived with her mother and father and two sisters and four brothers; the fact that Mrs. Kidd went to the Anglican Church and Mrs. Cross to the Free Methodist; that Mrs. Kidd married, at the age of twenty-three, a high-school teacher of science, and Mrs. Cross married, at the age of seventeen, a man who worked on the lake boats and never got to be a captain. Mrs. Cross had six children, Mrs. Kidd had three. Mrs. Cross’s husband died suddenly at forty-two with no life insurance; Mrs. Kidd’s husband retired to Goderich with a pension after years of being principal of the high school in a nearby town. Only recently has the gap closed. The children equalled things out; Mrs. Cross’s children, on the average, make as much money as Mrs. Kidd’s children, though they do not have as much education. Mrs. Cross’s grandchildren make more money.

Mrs. Cross has been in Hilltop Home three years and two months, Mrs. Kidd three years less a month. They both have bad hearts and ride around in wheelchairs to save their energy. During their first conversation, Mrs. Kidd said, “I don’t notice any hilltop.”

“You can see the highway,” said Mrs. Cross. “I guess that’s what they mean. Where did they put you?” she asked.

“I hardly know if I can find my way back. It’s a nice room, though. It’s a single.”

“Mine is too, I have a single. Is it the other side of the dining-room or this?”

“Oh. The other side.”

“That’s good. That’s the best part. Everybody’s in fairly good shape down there. It costs more, though. The better you are, the more it costs. The other side of the dining-room is out of their head.”

“Senile?”

“Senile. This side is the younger ones that have something like that the matter with them. For instance.” She nodded at a Mongoloid man of about fifty, who was trying to play the mouth organ. “Down in our part there’s also younger ones, but nothing the matter up here,” she tapped her head. “Just some disease. When it gets to the point they can’t look after themselves—upstairs. That’s where you get the far-gone ones. Then the crazies is another story. Locked up in the back wing. That’s the real crazies. Also, I think there is some place they have the ones that walk around but soil all the time.”

“Well, we are the top drawer,” said Mrs. Kidd with a tight smile. “I knew there would be plenty of senile ones, but I wasn’t prepared for the others. Such as.” She nodded discreetly at the Mongoloid who was doing a step-dance in front of the window.

Unlike most Mongoloids, he was thin and agile, though very pale and brittle-looking.

“Happier than most,” said Mrs. Cross, observing him. “This is the only place in the county, everything gets dumped here. After a while it doesn’t bother you.”

“It doesn’t bother me.”

MRS. KIDD’S ROOM is full of rocks and shells, in boxes and in bottles. She has a case of brittle butterflies and a case of stuffed song-birds. Her bookshelves contain Ferns and Mosses of North America, Peterson’s Guide to the Birds of Eastern North America, How to Know the Rocks and Minerals, and a book of Star Maps. The case of butterflies and the songbirds once hung in the classroom of her husband, the science teacher. He bought the songbirds, but he and Mrs. Kidd collected the butterflies themselves. Mrs. Kidd was a good student of botany and zoology. If she had not had what was perceived at the time as delicate health, she would have gone on and studied botany at a university, though few girls did such a thing then. Her children, who all live at a distance, send her beautiful books on subjects they are sure will interest her, but for the most part these books are large and heavy and she can’t find a way to look at them comfortably, so she soon relegates them to her bottom shelf. She would not admit it to her children, but her interest has waned, it has waned considerably. They say in their letters that they remember how she taught them about mushrooms; do you remember when we saw the destroying angel in Petrie’s Bush when we were living in Logan? Their letters are full of remembering. They want her fixed where she was forty or fifty years ago, these children who are ageing themselves. They have a notion of her that is as fond and necessary as any notion a parent ever had of a child. They celebrate what would in a child be called precocity: her brightness, her fund of knowledge, her atheism (a secret all those years her husband was in charge of the minds of the young), all the ways in which she differs from the average, or expected, old lady. She feels it a duty to hide from them the many indications that she is not so different as they think.

Mrs. Cross also gets presents from her children, but not books. Their thoughts run to ornaments, pictures, cushions. Mrs. Cross has a bouquet of artificial roses in which are set tubes of light, always shooting and bubbling up like a fountain. She has a Southern Belle whose satin skins are supposed to form an enormous pincushion. She has a picture of the Lord’s supper, in which a light comes on to form a halo around Jesus’s head. (Mrs. Kidd, after her first visit, wrote a letter to one of her children in which she described this picture and said she had tried to figure out what the Lord and his Disciples were eating and it appeared to be hamburgers. This is the sort of thing her children love to hear from her.) There is also, near the door, a life-size plaster statue of a collie dog which resembles a dog the Cross family had when the children were small: old Bonnie.

Mrs. Cross finds out from her children what these things cost and tells people. She says she is shocked.

Shortly after Mrs. Kidd’s arrival, Mrs. Cross took her along on a visit to the Second Floor. Mrs. Cross has been going up there every couple of weeks to visit a cousin of hers, old Lily Barbour.

“Lily is not running on all cylinders,” she warned Mrs. Kidd, as they wheeled themselves into the elevator. “Another thing, it doesn’t smell like Sweet Violets, in spite of them always spraying. They do the best they can.”

The first thing Mrs. Kidd saw as they got off the elevator was a little wrinkled-up woman with wild white hair, and a dress rucked up high on her bare legs (Mrs. Kidd snatched her eyes away from that) and a tongue she couldn’t seem to stuff back inside her mouth. The smell was of heated urine—you would think they had had it on the stove—as well as of floral sprays. But here was a smooth-faced sensible-looking person with a topknot, wearing an apron over a clean pink dress.

“Well, did you get the papers?” this woman said in a familiar way to Mrs. Cross and Mrs. Kidd.

“Oh, they don’t come in till about five o’clock,” said Mrs. Kidd politely, thinking she meant the newspaper.

“Never mind her,” said Mrs. Cross.

“I have to sign them today,” the woman said. “Otherwise it’ll be a catastrophe. They can put me out. You see I never knew it was illegal.” She spoke so well, so plausibly and confidentially, that Mrs. Kidd was convinced she had to make sense, but Mrs. Cross was wheeling vigorously away. Mrs. Kidd went after her.

“Don’t get tied up in that rigamarole,” said Mrs. Cross when Mrs. Kidd caught up to her. A woman with a terrible goitre, such as Mrs. Kidd had not seen for years, was smiling winningly at them. Up here nobody had teeth.

“I thought there was no such thing as a goitre any more,” Mrs. Kidd said. “With the iodine.”

They were going in the direction of a hollering voice.

“George!” the voice said. “George! Jessie! I’m here! Come and pull me up! George!”

Another voice was weaving cheerfully in and out of these yells. “Bad-bad-bad,” it said. “Bad. Bad-bad. Bad-bad-bad. Bad-bad.”

The owners of both these voices were sitting around a long table by a row of windows halfway down the hall. Nine or ten women were sitting there. Some were mumbling or singing softly to themselves. One was tearing apart a little embroidered cushion somebody had made. Another was eating a chocolate-covered ice-cream bar. Bits of chocolate had caught on her whiskers, dribbles of ice cream ran down her chin. None of them looked out the windows, or at each other. None of them paid any attention to George-and-Jessie, or to Bad-bad-bad, who were carrying on without a break.

Mrs. Kidd halted.

“Where is this Lily?”

“She’s down at the end. They don’t get her out of bed.”

“Well, you go on and see her,” said Mrs. Kidd. “I’m going back.” “There’s nothing to get upset about,” said Mrs. Cross. “They’re all off in their own little world. They’re happy as clams.”

“They may be, but I’m not,” said Mrs. Kidd. “I’ll see you in the Recreation Room.” She wheeled herself around and down the hall to the elevator where the pink lady was still inquiring urgently for her papers. She never came back.

MRS. CROSS and Mrs. Kidd used to play cards in the Recreation Room every afternoon. They put on earrings, stockings, afternoon dresses. They took turns treating for tea. On the whole, these afternoons were pleasant. They were well matched at cards.

Sometimes they played Scrabble, but Mrs. Cross did not take Scrabble seriously, as she did cards. She became frivolous and quarrelsome, defending words that were her own invention. So they went back to cards; they played rummy, most of the time. It was like school here. People paired off, they had best friends. The same people always sat together in the dining-room. Some people had nobody.

THE FIRST TIME Mrs. Cross took notice of Jack, he was in the Recreation Room, when she and Mrs. Kidd were playing cards. He had just come in a week or so before. Mrs. Kidd knew about him.

“Do you see that red-haired fellow by the window?” said Mrs. Kidd. “He’s in from a stroke. He’s only fifty-nine years old. I heard it in the dining-room before you got down.”

“Poor chap. That young.”

“He’s lucky to be alive at all. His parents are still alive, both of them, they’re still on a farm. He was back visiting them and he took the stroke and was lying face down in the barnyard when they found him. He wasn’t living around here, he’s from out west.”

“Poor chap,” said Mrs. Cross. “What did he work at?”

“He worked on a newspaper.”

“Was he married?”

“That I didn’t hear. He’s supposed to have been an alcoholic, then he joined A.A. and got over it. You can’t trust all you hear in this place.”

(That was true. There was usually a swirl of stories around any newcomer; stories about the money people had, or the places they had been, or the number of operations they have had and the plastic repairs or contrivances they carry around in or on their bodies. A few days later Mrs. Cross was saying that Jack had been the editor of a newspaper. First she heard it was in Sudbury, then she heard Winnipeg. She was saying he had had a nervous breakdown due to overwork; that was the truth, he had never been an alcoholic. She was saying he came from a good family. His name was Jack MacNeil.)

At present Mrs. Cross noticed how clean and tended he looked in his gray pants and light shirt. It was unnatural, at least for him; he looked like something that had gone soft from being too long in the water. He was a big man, but he could not hold himself straight, even in the wheelchair. The whole left side of his body was loose, emptied, powerless. His hair and moustache were not even gray yet, but fawn-colored. He was white as if just out of bandages.

A distraction occurred. The Gospel preacher who came every week to conduct a prayer service, with hymns (the more established preachers came, in turn, on Sundays), was walking through the Recreation Room with his wife close behind, the pair of them showering smiles and greetings wherever they could catch an eye. Mrs. Kidd looked up when they had passed and said softly but distinctly, “Joy to the World.”

At this, Jack, who was wheeling himself across the room in a clumsy way—he tended to go in circles—smiled. The smile was intelligent, ironic, and did not go with his helpless look. Mrs. Cross waved him over and wheeled part of the way to meet him. She introduced herself, and introduced Mrs. Kidd. He opened his mouth and said, “Anh-anh-anh.”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Cross encouragingly. “Yes?”

“Anh-anh-anh,” said Jack. He flapped his right hand. Tears came into his eyes.

“Are we playing cards?” said Mrs. Kidd.

“I have to get on with this game,” said Mrs. Cross. “You’re welcome to sit and watch. Were you a card player?”

His right hand came out and grabbed her chair, and he bent his head weeping. He tried to get the left hand up to wipe his face. He could lift it a few inches, then it fell back in his lap.

“Oh, well,” said Mrs. Cross softly. Then she remembered what you do when children cry; how to josh them out of it. “How can I tell what you’re saying if you’re going to cry? You just be patient. I have known people that have had strokes and got their speech back. Yes I have. You mustn’t cry, that won’t accomplish anything. You just take it slow. Boo-hoo-hoo,” she said, bending towards him. “Boo-hoohoo. You’ll have Mrs. Kidd and me crying next.”

That was the beginning of Mrs. Cross’s takeover of Jack. She got him to sit and watch the card game and to dry up, more or less, and make a noise which was a substitute for conversation (an-anh) rather than a desperate attempt at it (anh-anh-anh). Mrs. Cross felt something stretching in her. It was her old managing, watching power, her capacity for strategy, which if properly exercised could never be detected by those it was used on.

Mrs. Kidd could detect it, however.

“This isn’t what I call a card game,” she said.

MRS. CROSS soon found out that Jack could not stay interested in cards and there was no use trying to get him to play; it was conversation he was after. But trying to talk brought on the weeping.

“Crying doesn’t bother me,” she said to him. “I’ve seen tears and tears. But it doesn’t do you any good with a lot of people, to get a reputation for being a cry-baby.”

She started to ask him questions to which he could give yes-and-no answers. That brightened him up and let her test out her information.

Yes, he had worked on a newspaper. No, he was not married. No, the newspaper was not in Sudbury. Mrs. Cross began to reel off the name of every city she could think of but was unable to hit on the right one. He became agitated, tried to speak, and this time the syllables got close to a word, but she couldn’t catch it. She blamed herself, for not knowing enough places. Then, inspired, she ordered him to stay right where he was, not to move, she would be back, and she wheeled herself down the hall to the Library. There she looked for a book with maps in it. To her disgust there was not such a thing, there was nothing but love stories and religion. But she did not give up. She took off down the hall to Mrs. Kidd’s room. Since their card games had lapsed (they still played some days, but not every day), Mrs. Kidd spent many afternoons in her room. She was there now, lying on top of her bed, wearing an elegant purple dressing-gown with a high embroidered neck. She had a headache.

“Have you got one of those, like a geography book?” Mrs. Cross said. “A book with maps in it.” She explained that she wanted it for Jack.

“An atlas, you mean,” said Mrs. Kidd. “I think there may be. I can’t remember. You can look on the bottom shelf. I can’t remember what’s there.”

Mrs. Cross parked by the bookcase and began to lift the heavy books onto her lap one by one, reading the titles at close range. She was out of breath from the speed of her trip.

“You’re wearing yourself out,” said Mrs. Kidd. “You’ll get yourself upset and you’ll get him upset, and what is the point of it?”

“I’m not upset. It just seems a crime to me.”

“What does?”

“Such an intelligent man, what’s he doing in here? They should have put him in one of those places they teach you things, teach you how to talk again. What’s the name of them? You know. Why did they just stick him in here? I want to help him and I don’t know what to do. Well, I just have to try. If it was one of my boys like that and in a place where nobody knew him, I just hope some woman would take the same interest in him.”

“Rehabilitation,” said Mrs. Kidd. “The reason they put him in here is more than likely that the stroke was too bad for them to do anything for him.”

“Everything under the sun but a map-book,” said Mrs. Cross, not choosing to answer this. “He’ll think I’m not coming back.” She wheeled out of Mrs. Kidd’s room without a thank-you or good-bye. She was afraid Jack would think she hadn’t meant to come back, all she intended to do was to get rid of him. Sure enough, when she got to the Recreation Room he was gone. She did not know what to do. She was near tears herself. She didn’t know where his room was. She thought she would go to the office and ask; then she saw that it was five past four and the office would be closed. Lazy, those girls were. Four o’clock, get their coats on and go home, nothing matters to them. She went wheeling slowly along the corridor, wondering what to do. Then in one of the dead-end side corridors she saw Jack.

“There you are, what a relief! I didn’t know where to look for you. Did you think I wasn’t ever coming back? I’ll tell you what I went for. I was going to surprise you. I went to look for one of those books with maps in, what do you call them, so you could show me where you used to live. Atlases!”

He was sitting looking at the pink wall as if it was a window. Against the wall was a whatnot with a vase of plastic daffodils on it, and some figurines, dwarfs and dogs; on the wall were three paint-by-number pictures that had been done in the Craft Room.

“My friend Mrs. Kidd has more books than the Library. She has a book on nothing but bugs. Another nothing but the moon, when they went there, close up. But not such a simple thing as a map.”

Jack was pointing at one of the pictures.

“Which one are you pointing at?” said Mrs. Cross. “The one with the church with the cross? No? The one above that? The pine trees? Yes? What about it? The pine trees and the red deer?” He was smiling, waving his hand. She hoped he wouldn’t get too excited and disappointed this time. “What about it? This is like one of those things on television. Trees? Green? Pine trees? Is it the deer? Three deer? No? Yes. Three red deer?” He flapped his arm up and down and she said, “I don’t know, really. Three—red—deer. Wait a minute. That’s a place. I’ve heard it on the news. Red Deer. Red Deer! That’s the place! That’s the place you lived in! That’s the place where you worked on the newspaper! Red Deer.”

They were both jubilant. He waved his arm around in celebration, as if he was conducting an orchestra, and she leaned forward, laughing, clapping her hands on her knees.

“Oh, if everything was in pictures like that, we could have a lot of fun! You and me could have a lot of fun, couldn’t we?”

MRS. CROSS made an appointment to see the doctor.

“I’ve heard of people that had a very bad stroke and their speech came back, isn’t that so?”

“It can happen. It depends. Are you worrying a lot about this man?”

“It must be a terrible feeling. No wonder he cries.”

“How many children did you have?”

“Six.”

“I’d say you’d done your share of worrying.”

She could see he didn’t mean to tell her anything. Either he didn’t remember much about Jack’s case or he was pretending he didn’t.

“I’m here to take care of people,” the doctor said. “That’s what I’m here for, that’s what the nurses are here for. So you can leave all the worrying to us. That’s what we get paid for. Right?”

And how much worrying do you do? she wanted to ask.

She would have liked to talk to Mrs. Kidd about this visit because she knew Mrs. Kidd thought the doctor was a fool, but once Mrs. Kidd knew Jack was the reason for the visit she would make some impatient remark. Mrs. Cross never talked to her any more about Jack. She talked to other people, but she could see them getting bored. Nobody cares about anybody else’s misfortunes in here, she thought. Even when somebody dies they don’t care, it’s just me, I’m still alive, what’s for dinner? The selfishness. They’re all just as bad as the ones on the Second Floor, only they don’t show it yet.

She hadn’t been up to the Second Floor, hadn’t visited Lily Barbour, since she took up with Jack.

They liked sitting in the corner with the Red Deer picture, the scene of their first success. That was established as their place, where they could be by themselves. Mrs. Cross brought a pencil and paper, fixed the tray across his chair, tried to see how Jack made out with writing. It was about the same as talking. He would scrawl a bit, push the pencil till he broke it, start to cry. They didn’t make progress, either in writing or talking, it was useless. But she was learning to talk to him by the yes-and-no method, and it seemed sometimes she could pick up what was in his mind.

“If I was smarter I would be more of a help to you,” she said. “Isn’t it the limit? I can get it all out that’s in my head, but there never was so much in it, and you’ve got your head crammed full but you can’t get it out. Never mind. We’ll have a cup of coffee, won’t we? Cup of coffee, that’s what you like. My friend Mrs. Kidd and I used to drink tea all the time, but now I drink coffee. I prefer it too.”

“SO YOU NEVER got married? Never?”

Never.

“Did you have a sweetheart?”

Yes.

“Did you? Did you? Was it long ago? Long ago or recently?”

Yes.

“Long ago or recently? Both. Long ago and recently. Different sweethearts. The same? The same. The same woman. You were in love with the same woman years and years but you didn’t get married to her. Oh, Jack. Why didn’t you? Couldn’t she marry you? She couldn’t. Why not? Was she married already? Was she? Yes. Yes. Oh, my.”

She searched his face to see if this was too painful a subject or if he wanted to go on. She thought he did want to. She was eager to ask where this woman was now, but something warned her not to. Instead she took a light tone.

“I wonder if I can guess her name? Remember Red Deer? Wasn’t that funny? I wonder. I could start with A and work through the alphabet. Anne? Audrey? Annabelle? No. I think I’ll just follow my intuition. Jane? Mary? Louise?”

The name was Pat, Patricia, which she hit on maybe her thirtieth try.

“Now, in my mind a Pat is always fair. Not dark. You know how you have a picture in your mind for a name? Was she fair? Yes? And tall, in my mind a Pat is always tall. Was she? Well! I got it right. Tall and fair. A good-looking woman. A lovely woman.”

Yes.

She felt ashamed of herself, because she had wished for a moment that she had somebody to tell this to.

“That is a secret then. It’s between you and me. Now. If you ever want to write Pat a letter you come to me. Come to me and I’ll make out what you want to say to her and I’ll write it.”

No. No letter. Never.

“Well. I have a secret too. I had a boy I liked, he was killed in the First World War. He walked me home from a skating-party, it was our school skating-party. I was in the Senior Fourth. I was fourteen. That was before the war. I did like him, and I used to think about him, you know, and when I heard he was killed, that was after I was married, I was married at seventeen, well, when I heard he was killed I thought, now I’ve got something to look forward to, I could look forward to meeting him in Heaven. That’s true. That’s how childish I was.

“Marian was at that skating-party too. You know who I mean by Marian. Mrs. Kidd. She was there and she had the most beautiful outfit. It was sky-blue trimmed with white fur and a hood on it. Also she had a muff. She had a white fur muff. I never saw anything I would’ve like to have for myself as much as that muff.”

LYING IN THE DARK at night, before she went to sleep, Mrs. Cross would go over everything that had happened with Jack that day: how he had looked; how his color was; whether he had cried and how long and how often; whether he had been in a bad temper in the dining-room, annoyed with so many people around him or perhaps not liking the food; whether he had said good-night to her sullenly or gratefully.

Meanwhile Mrs. Kidd had taken on a new friend of her own. This was Charlotte, who used to live down near the dining-room but had recently moved in across the hall. Charlotte was a tall, thin, deferential woman in her mid-forties. She had multiple sclerosis. Sometimes her disease was in remission, as it was now; she could have gone home, if she had wanted to, and there had been a place for her. But she was happy where she was. Years of institutional life had made her childlike, affectionate, good-humored. She helped in the hair-dressing shop, she loved doing that, she loved brushing and pinning up Mrs. Kidd’s hair, marvelling at how much black there still was in it. She put an ash-blonde rinse on her own hair and wore it in a bouffant, stiff with spray. Mrs. Kidd could smell the hairspray from her room and she would call out, “Charlotte! Did they move you down here for the purpose of asphyxiating us?”

Charlotte giggled. She brought Mrs. Kidd a present. It was a red felt purse, with an appliquéd design of green leaves and blue and yellow flowers; she had made it in the Craft Room. Mrs. Kidd thought how much it resembled those recipe-holders her children used to bring home from school; a whole cardboard pie-plate and a half pie-plate, stitched together with bright yarn. They didn’t hold enough to be really useful. They were painstakingly created frivolities, like the crocheted potholders through which you could burn yourself; the cut-out wooden horse’s head with a hook not quite big enough to hold a hat.

Charlotte made purses for her daughters, who were married, and for her small granddaughter, and for the woman who lived with her husband and used his name. The husband and this woman came regularly to see Charlotte; they were all good friends. It had been a good arrangement for the husband, for the children, and perhaps for Charlotte herself. Nothing was being put over on Charlotte. Most likely she had given in without a whimper. Glad of the chance.

“What do you expect?” said Mrs. Cross. “Charlotte’s easygoing. Mrs. Cross and Mrs. Kidd had not had any falling-out or any real coolness. They still had some talks and card games. But it was difficult. They no longer sat at the same table in the dining-room because Mrs. Cross had to watch to see if Jack needed help cutting up his meat. He wouldn’t let anyone else cut it; he would just pretend he didn’t want any and miss out on his protein. Then Charlotte moved into the place Mrs. Cross had vacated. Charlotte had no problems cutting her meat. In fact she cut her meat, toast, egg, vegetables, cake, whatever she was eating that would cut, into tiny regular pieces before she started on it. Mrs. Kidd told her that was not good manners. Charlotte was crestfallen but stubborn and continued to do it.

“Neither you nor I would have given up so quickly,” said Mrs. Kidd, still speaking about Charlotte to Mrs. Cross. “We wouldn’t’ve had the choice.”

“That’s true. There weren’t places like this. Not pleasant places. They couldn’t have kept us alive the way they do her. The drugs and so on. Also it may be the drugs makes her silly.”

Mrs. Kidd remained silent, frowning at hearing Charlotte called silly, though that was just the blunt way of putting what she had been trying to say herself. After a moment she spoke lamely.

“I think she has more brains than she shows.”

Mrs. Cross said evenly, “I wouldn’t know.”

Mrs. Kidd sat with her head bent forward, thoughtfully. She could sit that way for half an hour, easily, letting Charlotte brush and tend her hair. Was she turning into one of those old ladies that love to be waited on? Those old ladies also needed somebody to boss. They were the sort who went around the world on cruise ships, she had read about them in novels. They went around the world, and stayed at hotels, or they lived in grand decaying houses, with their companions. It was so easy to boss Charlotte, to make her play Scrabble and tell her when her manners were bad. Charlotte was itching to be somebody’s slave. So why did Mrs. Kidd hope to restrain herself? She did not wish to be such a recognizable sort of old lady. Also, slaves cost more than they were worth. In the end, people’s devotion hung like rocks around your neck. Expectations. She wanted to float herself clear. Sometimes she could do it by lying on her bed and saying in her head all the poems she knew, or the facts, which got harder and harder to hold in place. Other times she imagined a house on the edge of some dark woods or bog, bright fields in front of it running down to the sea. She imagined she lived there alone, like an old woman in a story.

MRS. CROSS wanted to take Jack on visits. She thought it was time for him to learn to associate with people. He didn’t cry so often now, when they were alone. But sometimes at meals she was ashamed of him and had to tell him so. He would take offense at something, often she didn’t know what, and sometimes his sulk would proceed to the point where he would knock over the sugar-bowl, or sweep all his cutlery on to the floor. She thought that if only he could get used to a few more people as he was to her, he would calm down and behave decently.

The first time she took him to Mrs. Kidd’s’ room, Mrs. Kidd said she and Charlotte were just going out, they were going to the Crafts Room. She didn’t ask them to come along. The next time they came, Mrs. Kidd and Charlotte were sitting there playing Scrabble, so they were caught.

“You don’t mind if we watch you for a little while,” Mrs. Cross said.

“Oh no. But don’t blame me if you get bored. Charlotte takes a week from Wednesday to make up her mind.”

“We’re not in any hurry. We’re not expected anywhere. Are we, Jack?”

She was wondering if she could get Jack playing Scrabble. She didn’t know the extent of his problem when he tried to write. Was it that he couldn’t form the letters, was that all? Or couldn’t he see how they made the words? This might be the very thing for him.

At any rate he was taking an interest. He edged his chair up beside Charlotte, who picked up some letters, put them back, picked them up, looked at them in her hand, and finally made wind, working down from the w in Mrs. Kidd’s word elbow. Jack seemed to understand. He was so pleased that he patted Charlotte’s knee in congratulation. Mrs. Cross hoped Charlotte would realize that was just friendliness and not take offense.

She needn’t have worried. Charlotte did not know how to take offense.

“Well good for you,” said Mrs. Kidd, frowning, and right away she made demon across from the d. “Triple word!” she said, and was writing down the score. “Pick up your letters, Charlotte.”

Charlotte showed her new letters to Jack, one by one, and he made a noise of appreciation. Mrs. Cross kept an eye on him, hoping nothing would happen to turn him bad-tempered and spoil this show of friendliness. Nothing did. But he was not having a good effect on Charlotte’s concentration.

“You want to help?” Charlotte said, and moved the little stand with the letters on it so that it was in front of both of them. He bent over so that he almost had his head on her shoulder.

“Anh-anh-anh,” said Jack, but he sounded cheerful. “Anh-anh-anh?” said Charlotte, teasing him. “What kind of a word is that, anh-anh-anh?”

Mrs. Cross waited for the skies to fall, but the only thing Jack did was giggle, and Charlotte giggled, so that there was a sort of giggling-match set up between the two of them.

“Aren’t you the great friends,” said Mrs. Kidd.

Mrs. Cross thought it would be just as well not to exasperate Mrs. Kidd if they wanted to make a habit of visiting.

“Now Jack, don’t distract Charlotte,” she said affably. “You let her play.”

Even as she finished saying this, she saw Jack’s hand descend clumsily on the Scrabble board. The letters went flying. He turned and showed her his ugly look, worse than she had ever seen it. She was amazed and even frightened, but she did not mean to let him see.

“Now what have you done?” she said. “Fine behavior!”

He made a sound of disgust and pushed the Scrabble board and all the letters to the floor, all the time looking at Mrs. Cross so that there could be no doubt that this disgust and fury had been aroused by her. She knew that it was important at this moment to speak coldly and firmly. That was what you must do with a child or an animal, you must show them that your control has not budged and that you are not hurt or alarmed by such displays. But she was not able to say a word, such a feeling of grief, and shock, and helplessness rose in her heart. Her eyes filled with tears, and at the sight of her tears his expression grew even more hateful and menacing as if the feelings he had against her were boiling higher every moment.

Charlotte was smiling, either because she could not switch out of her giggling mood of a moment before or because she did not know how to do anything but smile, no matter what happened. She was pink-faced, apologetic, excited.

Jack managed to turn his chair around, with a violent, awkward motion. Charlotte stood up. Mrs. Cross made herself speak.

“Yes, you better push him home now. He better go home and cool off and repent of his bad manners. He better.”

Jack made a taunting sound, which seemed to point out that Mrs. Cross was just telling Charlotte to do what Charlotte was going to do anyway; Mrs. Cross was just pretending to have control of things. Charlotte had hold of the wheelchair and was pushing it towards the door, her smiling lips pressed together in concentration as she avoided the bookshelves and the butterfly case leaning against the wall. Perhaps it was hard for her to steer, perhaps the ordinary reflexes and balances of her body were not there for her to rely on. But she looked pleased; she raised her hand to them and released her smile, and set off down the corridor. She was just like one of those old-fashioned dolls, not the kind Mrs. Cross and Mrs. Kidd used to have but the kind their mothers had, with the long, limp bodies and pink-and-white faces and crimped china hair and ladylike smiles. Jack kept his face turned away; the bit of it Mrs. Cross could see was flushed red.

“It would be easy for any man to get the better of Charlotte,” said Mrs. Kidd when they were gone.

“I don’t think he’s so much of a danger,” said Mrs. Cross. She spoke in a dry tone but her voice was shaking.

Mrs. Kidd looked at the Scrabble board and the letters scattered all over the floor.

“We can’t do much about picking them up,” she said. “If either one of us bends over we black out.” That was true.

“Useless old crocks, aren’t we?” said Mrs. Cross. Her voice was under better control now.

“We won’t try. When the girl comes in with the juice I’ll ask her to do it. We don’t need to say how it happened. That’s what we’ll do. We won’t bend over and end up smashing our noses.”

Mrs. Cross felt her heart give a big flop. Her heart was like an old crippled crow, flopping around in her chest. She crossed her hands there, to hold it.

“Well, I never told you, I don’t think I did,” said Mrs. Kidd, with her eyes on Mrs. Cross’s face. “I never told you what happened that time I got out of bed too fast in my apartment, and I fell over on my face. I blacked out. Fortunately the woman was home, in the apartment underneath me, and she heard the crash and got the whatyamacallit, the man with the keys, the superintendent. They came and found me out cold and took me in the ambulance. I don’t remember a thing about it. I can’t remember anything that happened throughout the next three weeks. I wasn’t unconscious. I wish I had been. I was conscious and saying a lot of foolish things.

Do you know the first thing I remember? The psychiatrist coming to see me! They had got a psychiatrist in to determine whether I was loony. But nobody told me he was a psychiatrist. That’s part of it, they don’t tell you. He had a thing like an army jacket on. He was quite young. So I thought he was just some fellow who had walked in off the street.

“‘What is the name of the Prime Minister?’ he said to me.

“Well! I thought he was loony. So I said, ‘Who cares?’ And I turned my back on him as if I was going to sleep, and from that time on I remember everything.”

“Who cares!”

As a matter of fact, Mrs. Cross had heard Mrs. Kidd tell this story before, but it was a long time ago and she laughed now not just to be obliging; she laughed with relief. Mrs. Kidd’s firm voice had spread a numbing ointment over her misery.

Out of their combined laughter, Mrs. Kidd shot a quick serious question.

“Are you all right?”

Mrs. Cross lifted her hands from her chest, waited. “I think so. Yes. But I think I’ll go and lie down.”

In this exchange it was understood that Mrs. Kidd also said, “Your heart is weak, you shouldn’t put it at the mercy of these emotions,” and Mrs. Cross replied, “I will do as I do, though there may be something in what you say.”

“You haven’t got your chair,” Mrs. Kidd said. Mrs. Cross was sitting on an ordinary chair. She had come here walking slowly behind Jack’s chair, to help him steer.

“I can walk,” she said. “I can walk if I take my time.”

“No. You ride. You get in my chair and I’ll push you.”

“You can’t do that.”

“Yes I can. If I don’t use my energy I’ll get mad about my Scrabble game.”

Mrs. Cross heaved herself up and into Mrs. Kidd’s wheelchair. As she did so she felt such weakness in her legs that she knew Mrs. Kidd was right. She couldn’t have walked ten feet.

“Now then,” said Mrs. Kidd, and she negotiated their way out of the room into the corridor.

“Don’t strain yourself. Don’t try to go too fast.”

They proceeded down the corridor, turned left, made their way successfully up a very gentle ramp. Mrs. Cross could hear Mrs. Kidd’s breathing.

“Maybe I can manage the rest by myself.”

“No you can’t.”

They made another left turn at the top of the ramp. Now Mrs.

Cross’s room was in sight. It was three doors ahead of them.

“What I am going to do now,” said Mrs. Kidd, with emphasis and pauses to hide her breathlessness, “is give you a push. I can give you a push that will take you exactly to your own door.”

“Can you?” said Mrs. Cross doubtfully.

“Certainly. Then you can turn yourself in and get on the bed and take your time to get yourself settled, then ring for the girl and get her to deliver the chair back to me.”

“You won’t bash me into anything?”

“You watch.”

With that Mrs. Kidd gave the wheelchair a calculated, delicately balanced push. It rolled forward smoothly and came to a stop just where she had said it would, in exactly the right place in front of Mrs. Cross’s door. Mrs. Cross had hastily raised her feet and hands for this last bit of the ride. Now she dropped them. She gave a single, satisfied, conceding nod and turned and glided safely into her own room.

Mrs. Kidd, as soon as Mrs. Cross was out of sight, sank down and sat with her back against the wall, her legs stuck straight out in front of her on the cool linoleum. She prayed no nosy person would come along until she could recover her strength and get started on the trip back.