TANNER was conserving all his strength for the trip home. He meant to walk as far
as he could get and trust to the Almighty to get him the rest of the way. That
morning and the morning before, he had allowed his daughter to dress himand had
conserved that much more energy. Now he sat in the chair by the window—his
blue shirt buttoned at the collar, his coat on the back of the chair, and his hat on his
head—waiting for her to leave. He couldn’t escape until she got out of the way.
The window looked out on a brick wall and down into an alley full of New York
air, the kind fit for cats and garbage. A few snow flakes drifted past the window
but they were too thin and scattered for his failing vision.
The daughter was in the kitchen washing dishes. She dawdled over everything,
talking to herself. When he had first come, he had answered her, but that had not
been wanted. She glowered at him as if, old fool that he was, he should still have
had sense enough not to answer a woman talking to herself. She questioned herself
in one voice and answered herself in another. With the energy he had conserved
yesterday letting her dress him, he had written a note and pinned it in his pocket. IF
FOUND DEAD SHIP EXPRESS COLLECT TO COLEMAN PARRUM, CORINTH, GEORGIA. Under
this he had continued: COLEMAN SELL MY BELONGINGS AND PAY THE FREIGHT ON ME
& THE UNDERTAKER. ANYTHING LEFT OVER YOU CAN KEEP. YOURS TRULY T. C.
TANNER. P.S. STAY WHERE YOU ARE. DON’T LET THEM TALK YOU INTO COMING UP
HERE. ITS NO KIND OF PLACE. It had taken him the better part of thirty minutes to
write the paper; the script was wavery but decipherable with patience. He
controlled one hand by holding the other on top of it. By the time he had got it
written, she was back in the apartment fromgetting her groceries.
Today he was ready. All he had to do was push one foot in front of the other
until he got to the door and down the steps. Once down the steps, he would get out
of the neighborhood. Once out of it, he would hail a taxi cab and go to the freight
yards. Some bum would help him onto a car. Once he got in the freight car, he
would lie down and rest. During the night the train would start South, and the next
day or the morning after, dead or alive, he would be home. Dead or alive. It was
being there that mattered; the dead or alive did not.
If he had had good sense he would have gone the day after he arrived; better
sense and he would not have arrived. He had not got desperate until two days ago
when he had heard his daughter and son-in-law taking leave of each other after
breakfast. They were standing in the front door, she seeing him off for a three-day
trip. He drove a long distance moving van. She must have handed him his leather
headgear. “You ought to get you a hat,” she said, “a real one.”
“And sit all day in it,” the son-in-law said, “like him in there. Yah! All he
does is sit all day with that hat on. Sits all day with that damn black hat on his
head. Inside!”
“Well you don’t even have you a hat,” she said. “Nothing but that leather cap
with flaps. People that are somebody wear hats. Other kinds wear those leather
caps like you got on.”
“People that are somebody!” he cried. “People that are somebody! That kills
me! That really kills me!” The son-in-law had a stupid muscular face and a yankee
voice to go with it.
“My daddy is here to stay,” his daughter said. “He ain’t going to last long. He
was somebody when he was somebody. He never worked for nobody in his life
but himself and had people—other people—working for him.”
“Yah? Niggers is what he had working for him,” the son-in-law said. “That’s
all. I’ve worked a nigger or two myself.”
“Those were just nawthun niggers you worked,” she said, her voice suddenly
going lower so that Tanner had to lean forward to catch the words. “It takes brains
to work a real nigger. You got to know how to handle them.”
“Yah so I don’t have brains,” the son-in-law said.
One of the sudden, very occasional, feelings of warmth for the daughter came
over Tanner. Every now and then she said something that might make you think she
had a little sense stored away somewhere for safe keeping.
“You got them,” she said. “You don’t always use them.”
“He has a stroke when he sees a nigger in the building,” the son-in-law said,
“and she tells me…”
“Shut up talking so loud,” she said. “That’s not why he had the stroke.”
There was a silence. “Where you going to bury him?” the son-in-law asked,
taking a different tack.
“Bury who?”
“Himin there.”
“Right here in New York,” she said. “Where do you think? We got a lot. I’m
not taking that trip down there again with nobody.”
“Yah. Well I just wanted to make sure,” he said.
When she returned to the room, Tanner had both hands gripped on the chair
arms. His eyes were trained on her like the eyes of an angry corpse. “You
promised you’d bury me there,” he said. “Your promise ain’t any good. Your
promise ain’t any good. Your promise ain’t any good.” His voice was so dry it
was barely audible. He began to shake, his hands, his head, his feet. “Bury me
here and burn in hell!” he cried and fell back into his chair.
The daughter shuddered to attention. “You ain’t dead yet!” She threw out a
ponderous sigh. “You got a long time to be worrying about that.” She turned and
began to pick up parts of the newspaper scattered on the floor. She had gray hair
that hung to her shoulders and a round face, beginning to wear. “I do every last
living thing for you,” she muttered, “and this is the way you carry on.” She stuck
the papers under her arm and said, “And don’t throw hell at me. I don’t believe in
it. That’s a lot of hardshell Baptist hooey.” Then she went into the kitchen.
He kept his mouth stretched taut, his top plate gripped between his tongue and
the roof of his mouth. Still the tears flooded down his cheeks; he wiped each one
furtively on his shoulder.
Her voice rose from the kitchen. “As bad as having a child. He wanted to
come and now he’s here, he don’t like it.”
He had not wanted to come.
“Pretended he didn’t but I could tell. I said if you don’t want to come I can’t
make you. If you don’t want to live like decent people there’s nothing I can do
about it.”
“As for me,” her higher voice said, “when I die that ain’t the time I’m going to
start getting choosey. They can lay me in the nearest spot. When I pass from this
world I’ll be considerate of themthat stay in it. I won’t be thinking of just myself.”
“Certainly not,” the other voice said, “You never been that selfish. You’re the
kind that looks out for other people.”
“Well I try,” she said, “I try.”
He laid his head on the back of the chair for a moment and the hat tilted down
over his eyes. He had raised three boys and her. The three boys were gone, two in
the war and one to the devil and there was nobody left who felt a duty toward him
but her, married and childless, in New York City like Mrs. Big and ready when
she came back and found himliving the way he was to take himback with her. She
had put her face in the door of the shack and had stared, expressionless, for a
second. Then all at once she had screamed and jumped back.
“What’s that on the floor?”
“Coleman,” he said.
The old Negro was curled up on a pallet asleep at the foot of Tanner’s bed, a
stinking skin full of bones, arranged in what seemed vaguely human form. When
Coleman was young, he had looked like a bear; now that he was old he looked
like a monkey. With Tanner it was the opposite; when he was young he had looked
like a monkey but when he got old, he looked like a bear.
The daughter stepped back onto the porch. There were the bottoms of two cane
chairs tilted against the clapboard but she declined to take a seat. She stepped out
about ten feet from the house as if it took that much space to clear the odor. Then
she had spoken her piece.
“If you don’t have any pride I have and I know my duty and I was raised to do
it. My mother raised me to do it if you didn’t. She was from plain people but not
the kind that likes to settle in with niggers.”
At that point the old Negro roused up and slid out the door, a doubled-up
shadow which Tanner just caught sight of gliding away.
She had shamed him. He shouted so they both could hear. “Who you think
cooks? Who you think cuts my firewood and empties my slops? He’s paroled to
me. That no-good scoundrel has been on my hands for thirty years. He ain’t a bad
nigger.”
She was unimpressed. “Whose shack is this anyway?” she had asked. “Yours
or his?”
“Him and me built it,” he said. “You go on back up there. I wouldn’t come
with you for no million dollars or no sack of salt.”
“It looks like himand you built it. Whose land is it on?”
“Some people that live in Florida,” he said evasively. He had known then that
it was land up for sale but he thought it was too sorry for anyone to buy. That same
afternoon he had found out different. He had found out in time to go back with her.
If he had found out a day later, he might still be there, squatting on the doctor’s
land.
When he saw the brown porpoise-shaped figure striding across the field that
afternoon, he had known at once what had happened; no one had to tell him. If that
nigger had owned the whole world except for one runty rutted peafield and he
acquired it, he would walk across it that way, beating the weeds aside, his thick
neck swelled, his stomach a throne for his gold watch and chain. Doctor Foley. He
was only part black. The rest was Indian and white.
He was everything to the niggers—druggist and undertaker and general
counsel and real estate man and sometimes he got the evil eye off them and
sometimes he put it on. Be prepared, he said to himself, watching himapproach, to
take something off him, nigger though he be. Be prepared, because you ain’t got a
thing to hold up to himbut the skin you come in, and that’s no more use to you now
than what a snake would shed. You don’t have a chance with the government
against you.
He was sitting on the porch in the piece of straight chair tilted against the
shack. “Good evening, Foley,” he said and nodded as the doctor came up and
stopped short at the edge of the clearing, as if he had only just that minute seen him
though it was plain he had sighted himas he crossed the field.
“I be out here to look at my property,” the doctor said. “Good evening.” His
voice was quick and high.
Ain’t been your property long, he said to himself. “I seen you coming,” he
said.
“I acquired this here recently,” the doctor said and proceeded without looking
at him again to walk around to one side of the shack. In a moment he came back
and stopped in front of him. Then he stepped boldly to the door of the shack and
put his head in. Coleman was in there that time too, asleep. He looked for a
moment and then turned aside. “I know that nigger,” he said. “Coleman Parrum—
how long does it take himto sleep off that stump liquor you all make?”
Tanner took hold of the knobs on the chair bottom and held them hard. “This
shack ain’t in your property. Only on it, by my mistake,” he said.
The doctor removed his cigar momentarily from his mouth. “It ain’t my mistake,” he said and smiled.
He had only sat there, looking ahead.
“It don’t pay to make this kind of mis-take,” the doctor said.
“I never found nothing that paid yet,” he muttered.
“Everything pays,” the Negro said, “if you knows how to make it,” and he
remained there smiling, looking the squatter up and down. Then he turned and
went around the other side of the shack. There was a silence. He was looking for
the still.
Then would have been the time to kill him. There was a gun inside the shack
and he could have done it as easy as not, but, from childhood, he had been
weakened for that kind of violence by the fear of hell. He had never killed one, he
had always handled them with his wits and with luck. He was known to have a
way with niggers. There was an art to handling them. The secret of handling a
nigger was to show him his brains didn’t have a chance against yours; then he
would jump on your back and know he had a good thing there for life. He had had
Coleman on his back for thirty years.
Tanner had first seen Coleman when he was working six of them at a saw mill
in the middle of a pine forest fifteen miles from nowhere. They were as sorry a
crew as he had worked, the kind that on Monday they didn’t show up. What was in
the air had reached them. They thought there was a new Lincoln elected who was
going to abolish work. He managed them with a very sharp penknife. He had had
something wrong with his kidney then that made his hands shake and he had taken
to whittling to force that waste motion out of sight. He did not intend them to see
that his hands shook of their own accord and he did not intend to see it himself or
to countenance it. The knife had moved constantly, violently, in his quaking hands
and here and there small crude figures—that he never looked at again and could
not have said what they were if he had—dropped to the ground. The Negroes
picked them up and took them home; there was not much time between them and
darkest Africa. The knife glittered constantly in his hands. More than once he had
stopped short and said in an off-hand voice to some half-reclining, head-averted
Negro, “Nigger, this knife is in my hand now but if you don’t quit wasting my time
and money, it’ll be in your gut shortly.” And the Negro would begin to rise—
slowly, but he would be in the act—before the sentence was completed.
A large black loose-jointed Negro, twice his own size, had begun hanging
around the edge of the saw mill, watching the others work and when he was not
watching, sleeping, in full view of them, sprawled like a gigantic bear on his
back. “Who is that?” he had asked. “If he wants to work, tell him to come here. If
he don’t, tell himto go. No idlers are going to hang around here.”
None of them knew who he was. They knew he didn’t want to work. They
knew nothing else, not where he had come from, nor why, though he was probably
brother to one, cousin to all of them. He had ignored him for a day; against the six
of them he was one yellow-faced scrawny white man with shaky hands. He was
willing to wait for trouble, but not forever. The next day the stranger came again.
After the six Tanner worked had seen the idler there for half the morning, they quit
and began to eat, a full thirty minutes before noon. He had not risked ordering
themup. He had gone to the source of the trouble.
The stranger was leaning against a tree on the edge of the clearing, watching
with half-closed eyes. The insolence on his face barely covered the wariness
behind it. His look said, this ain’t much of a white man so why he come on so big,
what he fixing to do?
He had meant to say, “Nigger, this knife is in my hand now but if you ain’t out
of my sight…” but as he drew closer he changed his mind. The Negro’s eyes were
small and bloodshot. Tanner supposed there was a knife on him somewhere that
he would as soon use as not. His own penknife moved, directed solely by some
intruding intelligence that worked in his hands. He had no idea what he was
carving, but when he reached the Negro, he had already made two holes the size
of half dollars in the piece of bark.
The Negro’s gaze fell on his hands and was held. His jaw slackened. His eyes
did not move from the knife tearing recklessly around the bark. He watched as if
he saw an invisible power working on the wood.
He looked himself then and, astonished, saw the connected rims of a pair of
spectacles.
He held them away from him and looked through the holes past a pile of
shavings and on into the woods to the edge of the pen where they kept their mules.
“You can’t see so good, can you, boy?” he said and began scraping the ground
with his foot to turn up a piece of wire. He picked up a small piece of haywire; in
a minute he found another, shorter piece and picked that up. He began to attach
these to the bark. He was in no hurry now that he knew what he was doing. When
the spectacles were finished, he handed themto the Negro. “Put these on,” he said.
“I hate to see anybody can’t see good.”
There was an instant when the Negro might have done one thing or another,
might have taken the glasses and crushed themin his hand or grabbed the knife and
turned it on him. He saw the exact instant in the muddy liquor-swollen eyes when
the pleasure of having a knife in this white man’s gut was balanced against
something else, he could not tell what.
The Negro reached for the glasses. He attached the bows carefully behind his
ears and looked forth. He peered this way and that with exaggerated solemnity.
And then he looked directly at Tanner and grinned, or grimaced, Tanner could not
tell which, but he had an instant’s sensation of seeing before him a negative image
of himself, as if clownishness and captivity had been their common lot. The vision
failed himbefore he could decipher it.
“Preacher,” he said, “what you hanging around here for?” He picked up
another piece of bark and began, without looking at it, to carve again. “This ain’t
Sunday.”
“This here ain’t Sunday?” the Negro said.
“This is Friday,” he said. “That’s the way it is with you preachers—drunk all
week so you don’t know when Sunday is. What you see through those glasses?”
“See a man.”
“What kind of a man?”
“See the man make theseyer glasses.”
“Is he white or black?”
“He white!” the Negro said as if only at that moment was his vision
sufficiently improved to detect it. “Yessuh, he white!” he said.
“Well, you treat himlike he was white,” Tanner said. “What’s your name?”
“Name Coleman,” the Negro said.
And he had not got rid of Coleman since. You make a monkey out of one of
themand he jumps on your back and stays there for life, but let one make a monkey
out of you and all you can do is kill him or disappear. And he was not going to
hell for killing a nigger. Behind the shack he heard the doctor kick over a bucket.
He sat and waited.
In a moment the doctor appeared again, beating his way around the other side
of the house, whacking at scattered clumps of Johnson grass with his cane. He
stopped in the middle of the yard, about where that morning the daughter had
delivered her ultimatum.
“You don’t belong here,” he began. “I could have you prosecuted.”
Tanner remained there, dumb, staring across the field.
“Where’s your still?” the doctor asked.
“If it’s a still around here, it don’t belong to me,” he said and shut his mouth
tight.
The Negro laughed softly. “Down on your luck, ain’t you?” he murmured.
“Didn’t you used to own a little piece of land over acrost the river and lost it?”
He had continued to study the woods ahead.
“If you want to run the still for me, that’s one thing,” the doctor said. “If you
don’t, you might as well had be packing up.”
“I don’t have to work for you,” he said. “The governmint ain’t got around yet
to forcing the white folks to work for the colored.”
The doctor polished the stone in his ring with the ball of his thumb. “I don’t
like the governmint no bettern you,” he said. “Where you going instead? You going
to the city and get you a soot of rooms at the Biltmo’ Hotel?”
Tanner said nothing.
“The day coming,” the doctor said, “when the white folks IS going to be
working for the colored and you mights well to git ahead of the crowd.”
“That day ain’t coming for me,” Tanner said shortly.
“Done come for you,” the doctor said. “Ain’t come for the rest of them.”
Tanner’s gaze drove on past the farthest blue edge of the tree line into the pale
empty afternoon sky. “I got a daughter in the north,” he said. “I don’t have to work
for you.”
The doctor took his watch from his watch pocket and looked at it and put it
back. He gazed for a moment at the back of his hands. He appeared to have
measured and to know secretly the time it would take everything to change finally
upside down. “She don’t want no old daddy like you,” he said. “Maybe she say
she do, but that ain’t likely. Even if you rich,” he said, “they don’t want you. They
got they own ideas. The black ones they rares and they pitches. I made mine,” he
said, “and I ain’t done none of that.” He looked again at Tanner. “I be back here
next week,” he said, “and if you still here, I know you going to work for me.” He
remained there a moment, rocking on his heels, waiting for some answer. Finally
he turned and started beating his way back through the overgrown path.
Tanner had continued to look across the field as if his spirit had been sucked
out of him into the woods and nothing was left on the chair but a shell. If he had
known it was a question of this—sitting here looking out of this window all day in
this no-place, or just running a still for a nigger, he would have run the still for the
nigger. He would have been a nigger’s white nigger any day. Behind him he heard
the daughter come in from the kitchen. His heart accelerated but after a second he
heard her plump herself down on the sofa. She was not yet ready to go. He did not
turn and look at her.
She sat there silently a few moments. Then she began. “The trouble with you
is,” she said, “you sit in front of that window all the time where there’s nothing to
look out at. You need some inspiration and an out-let. If you would let me pull
your chair around to look at the TV, you would quit thinking about morbid stuff,
death and hell and judgement. My Lord.”
“The Judgement is coming,” he muttered. “The sheep’ll be separated from the
goats. Them that kept their promises from them that didn’t. Them that did the best
they could with what they had fromthemthat didn’t. Themthat honored their father
and their mother fromthemthat cursed them. Themthat…”
She heaved a mammoth sigh that all but drowned him out. “What’s the use in
me wasting my good breath?” she asked. She rose and went back in the kitchen
and began knocking things about.
She was so high and mighty! At home he had been living in a shack but there
was at least air around it. He could put his feet on the ground. Here she didn’t
even live in a house. She lived in a pigeon-hutch of a building, with all stripes of
foreigner, all of them twisted in the tongue. It was no place for a sane man. The
first morning here she had taken him sightseeing and he had seen in fifteen minutes
exactly how it was. He had not been out of the apartment since. He never wanted
to set foot again on the underground railroad or the steps that moved under you
while you stood still or any elevator to the thirty-fourth floor. When he was safely
back in the apartment again, he had imagined going over it with Coleman. He had
to turn his head every few seconds to make sure Coleman was behind him. Keep
to the inside or these people’ll knock you down, keep right behind me or you’ll get
left, keep your hat on, you damn idiot, he had said, and Coleman had come on with
his bent running shamble, panting and muttering, What we doing here? Where you
get this fool idea coming here?
I come to show you it was no kind of place. Now you know you were well off
where you were.
I knowed it before, Coleman said. Was you didn’t know it.
When he had been here a week, he had got a postcard from Coleman that had
been written for him by Hooten at the railroad station. It was written in green ink
and said, “This is Coleman—X—howyou boss.” Under it Hooten had written
from himself, “Quit frequenting all those nitespots and come on home, you
scoundrel, yours truly. W. P. Hooten.” He had sent Coleman a card in return, care
of Hooten, that said, “This place is alrite if you like it. Yours truly, W. T.
Tanner.” Since the daughter had to mail the card, he had not put on it that he was
returning as soon as his pension check came. He had not intended to tell her but to
leave her a note. When the check came, he would hire himself a taxi to the bus
station and be on his way. And it would have made her as happy as it made him.
She had found his company dour and her duty irksome. If he had sneaked out, she
would have had the pleasure of having tried to do it and to top that off, the
pleasure of his ingratitude.
As for him, he would have returned to squat on the doctor’s land and to take
his orders from a nigger who chewed ten-cent cigars. And to think less about it
than formerly. Instead he had been done in by a nigger actor, or one who called
himself an actor. He didn’t believe the nigger was any actor.
There were two apartments on each floor of the building. He had been with the
daughter three weeks when the people in the next hutch moved out. He had stood
in the hall and watched the moving out and the next day he had watched a movingin. The hall was narrow and dark and he stood in the corner out of the way,
offering only a suggestion every now and then to the movers that would have made
their work easier for them if they had paid any attention. The furniture was new
and cheap so he decided the people moving in might be a newly married couple
and he would just wait around until they came and wish themwell. After a while a
large Negro in a light blue suit came lunging up the stairs, carrying two canvas
suitcases, his head lowered against the strain. Behind him stepped a young tanskinned woman with bright copper-colored hair. The Negro dropped the suitcases
with a thud in front of the door of the next apartment.
“Be careful, Sweetie,” the woman said. “My make-up is in there.”
It broke upon himthen just what was happening.
The Negro was grinning. He took a swipe at one of her hips.
“Quit it,” she said, “there’s an old guy watching.”
They both turned and looked at him.
“Had-do,” he said and nodded. Then he turned quickly into his own door.
His daughter was in the kitchen. “Who you think’s rented that apartment over
there?” he asked, his face alight.
She looked at himsuspiciously. “Who?” she muttered.
“A nigger!” he said in a gleeful voice. “A South Alabama nigger if I ever saw
one. And got himthis high-yeller, high-stepping woman with red hair and they two
are going to live next door to you!” He slapped his knee. “Yes siree!” he said.
“Damn if they ain’t!” It was the first time since coming up here that he had had
occasion to laugh.
Her face squared up instantly. “All right now you listen to me,” she said. “You
keep away from them. Don’t you go over there trying to get friendly with him.
They ain’t the same around here and I don’t want any trouble with niggers, you
hear me? If you have to live next to them, just you mind your business and they’ll
mind theirs. That’s the way people were meant to get along in this world.
Everybody can get along if they just mind their business. Live and let live.” She
began to wrinkle her nose like a rabbit, a stupid way she had. “Up here everybody
minds their own business and everybody gets along. That’s all you have to do.”
“I was getting along with niggers before you were born,” he said. He went
back out into the hall and waited. He was willing to bet the nigger would like to
talk to someone who understood him. Twice while he waited, he forgot and in his
excitement, spit his tobacco juice against the baseboard. In about twenty minutes,
the door of the apartment opened again and the Negro came out. He had put on a
tie and a pair of horn-rimmed spectacles and Tanner noticed for the first time that
he had a small almost invisible goatee. A real swell. He came on without
appearing to see there was anyone else in the hall.
“Haddy, John,” Tanner said and nodded, but the Negro brushed past without
hearing and went rattling rapidly down the stairs.
Could be deaf and dumb, Tanner thought. He went back into the apartment and
sat down but each time he heard a noise in the hall, he got up and went to the door
and stuck his head out to see if it might be the Negro. Once in the middle of the
afternoon, he caught the Negro’s eye just as he was rounding the bend of the stairs
again but before he could get out a word, the man was in his own apartment and
had slammed the door. He had never known one to move that fast unless the police
were after him.
He was standing in the hall early the next morning when the woman came out
of her door alone, walking on high gold-painted heels. He wished to bid her good
morning or simply to nod but instinct told him to beware. She didn’t look like any
kind of woman, black or white, he had ever seen before and he remained pressed
against the wall, frightened more than anything else, and feigning invisibility.
The woman gave him a flat stare, then turned her head away and stepped wide
of him as if she were skirting an open garbage can. He held his breath until she
was out of sight. Then he waited patiently for the man.
The Negro came out about eight o’clock.
This time Tanner advanced squarely in his path. “Good morning, Preacher,” he
said. It had been his experience that if a Negro tended to be sullen, this title
usually cleared up his expression.
The Negro stopped abruptly.
“I seen you move in,” Tanner said. “I ain’t been up here long myself. It ain’t
much of a place if you ask me. I reckon you wish you were back in South
Alabama.”
The Negro did not take a step or answer. His eyes began to move. They moved
from the top of the black hat, down to the collarless blue shirt, neatly buttoned at
the neck, down the faded galluses to the gray trousers and the high-top shoes and
up again, very slowly, while some unfathomable dead-cold rage seemed to stiffen
and shrink him.
“I thought you might know somewhere around here we could find us a pond,
Preacher,” Tanner said in a voice growing thinner but still with considerable hope
in it.
A seething noise came out of the Negro before he spoke. “I’m not from South
Alabama,” he said in a breathless wheezing voice. “I’mfromNew York City. And
I’mnot no preacher! I’man actor.”
Tanner chortled. “It’s a little actor in most preachers, ain’t it?” he said and
winked. “I reckon you just preach on the side.”
“I don’t preach!” the Negro cried and rushed past him as if a swarm of bees
had suddenly come down on him out of nowhere. He dashed down the stairs and
was gone.
Tanner stood here for some time before he went back in the apartment. The
rest of the day he sat in his chair and debated whether he would have one more try
at making friends with him. Every time he heard a noise on the stairs he went to
the door and looked out, but the Negro did not return until late in the afternoon.
Tanner was standing in the hall waiting for him when he reached the top of the
stairs. “Good evening, preacher,” he said, forgetting that the Negro called himself
an actor.
The Negro stopped and gripped the banister rail. A tremor racked him from
his head to his crotch. Then he began to come forward slowly. When he was close
enough he lunged and grasped Tanner by both shoulders. “I don’t take no crap,” he
whispered, “off no wool-hat red-neck son-of-a-bitch peckerwood old bastard like
you.” He caught his breath. And then his voice came out in the sound of an
exasperation so profound that it rocked on the verge of a laugh. It was high and
piercing and weak, “And I’m not no preacher! I’m not even no Christian. I don’t
believe that crap. There ain’t no Jesus and there ain’t no God.”
The old man felt his heart inside him hard and tough as an oak knot. “And you
ain’t black,” he said. “And I ain’t white!”
The Negro slammed him against the wall. He yanked the black hat down over
his eyes. Then he grabbed his shirt front and shoved him backwards to his open
door and knocked him through it. From the kitchen the daughter saw him blindly
hit the edge of the inside hall door and fall reeling into the living room.
For days his tongue appeared to be frozen in his mouth. When it unthawed it
was twice its normal size and he could not make her understand him. What he
wanted to know was if the government check had come because he meant to buy a
bus ticket with it and go home. After a few days, he made her understand. “It
came,” she said, “and it’ll just pay the first two weeks’ doctor-bill and please tell
me how you’re going home when you can’t talk or walk or think straight and you
got one eye crossed yet? Just please tell me that?”
It had come to him then slowly just what his present situation was. At least he
would have to make her understand that he must be sent home to be buried. They
could have him shipped back in a refrigerated car so that he would keep for the
trip. He didn’t want any undertaker up here messing with him. Let them get him off
at once and he would come in on the early morning train and they could wire
Hooten to get Coleman and Coleman would do the rest; she would not even have
to go herself. After a lot of argument, he wrung the promise from her. She would
ship himback.
After that he slept peacefully and improved a little. In his dreams he could feel
the cold early morning air of home coming in through the cracks of the pine box.
He could see Coleman waiting, red-eyed, on the station platform and Hooten
standing there with his green eyeshade and black alpaca sleeves. If the old fool
had stayed at home where he belonged, Hooten would be thinking, he wouldn’t be
arriving on the 6:03 in no box. Coleman had turned the borrowed mule and cart so
that they could slide the box off the platform onto the open end of the wagon.
Everything was ready and the two of them, shut-mouthed, inched the loaded coffin
toward the wagon. From inside he began to scratch on the wood. They let go as if
it had caught fire.
They stood looking at each other, then at the box.
“That him,” Coleman said. “He in there his self.”
“Naw,” Hooten said, “must be a rat got in there with him.”
“That him. This here one of his tricks.”
“If it’s a rat he might as well stay.”
“That him. Git a crowbar.”
Hooten went grumbling off and got the crowbar and came back and began to
pry open the lid. Even before he had the upper end pried open, Coleman was
jumping up and down, wheezing and panting from excitement. Tanner gave a thrust
upward with both hands and sprang up in the box. “Judgement Day! Judgement
Day!” he cried. “Don’t you two fools know it’s Judgement Day?”
Now he knew exactly what her promises were worth. He would do as well to
trust to the note pinned in his coat and to any stranger who found him dead in the
street or in the boxcar or wherever. There was nothing to be looked for from her
except that she would do things her way. She came out of the kitchen again,
holding her hat and coat and rubber boots.
“Now listen,” she said, “I have to go to the store. Don’t you try to get up and
walk around while I’m gone. You’ve been to the bathroom and you shouldn’t have
to go again. I don’t want to find you on the floor when I get back.”
You won’t find me atall when you get back, he said to himself. This was the
last time he would see her flat dumb face. He felt guilty. She had been good to him
and he had been nothing but a nuisance to her.
“Do you want you a glass of milk before I go?” she asked.
“No,” he said. Then he drew breath and said, “You got a nice place here. It’s a
nice part of the country. I’m sorry if I’ve give you a lot of trouble getting sick. It
was my fault trying to be friendly with that nigger.” And I’m a damned liar
besides, he said to himself to kill the outrageous taste such a statement made in his
mouth.
For a moment she stared as if he were losing his mind. Then she seemed to
think better of it. “Now don’t saying something pleasant like that once in a while
make you feel better?” she asked and sat down on the sofa.
His knees itched to unbend. Git on, git on, he fumed silently. Make haste and
go.
“It’s great to have you here,” she said. “I wouldn’t have you any other place.
My own daddy.” She gave him a big smile and hoisted her right leg up and began
to pull on her boot. “I wouldn’t wish a dog out on a day like this,” she said, “but I
got to go. You can sit here and hope I don’t slip and break my neck.” She stamped
the booted foot on the floor and then began to tackle the other one.
He turned his eyes to the window. The snow was beginning to stick and freeze
to the outside pane. When he looked at her again, she was standing there like a big
doll stuffed into its hat and coat. She drew on a pair of green knitted gloves.
“Okay,” she said, “I’mgone. You sure you don’t want anything?”
“No,” he said, “go ahead on.”
“Well so long then,” she said.
He raised the hat enough to reveal a bald palely speckled head. The hall door
closed behind her. He began to tremble with excitement. He reached behind him
and drew the coat into his lap. When he got it on, he waited until he had stopped
panting, then he gripped the arms of the chair and pulled himself up. His body felt
like a great heavy bell whose clapper swung from side to side but made no noise.
Once up, he remained standing a moment, swaying until he got his balance. A
sensation of terror and defeat swept over him. He would never make it. He would
never get there dead or alive. He pushed one foot forward and did not fall and his
confidence returned. “The Lord is my shepherd,” he muttered, “I shall not want.”
He began moving toward the sofa where he would have support. He reached it.
He was on his way.
By the time he got to the door, she would be down the four flights of steps and
out of the building. He got past the sofa and crept along by the wall, keeping his
hand on it for support. Nobody was going to bury him here. He was as confident
as if the woods of home lay at the bottom of the stairs. He reached the front door
of the apartment and opened it and peered into the hall. This was the first time he
had looked into it since the actor had knocked himdown. It was dank-smelling and
empty. The thin piece of linoleum stretched its moldy length to the door of the
other apartment, which was closed. “Nigger actor,” he said.
The head of the stairs was ten or twelve feet from where he stood and he bent
his attention to getting there without creeping around the long way with a hand on
the wall. He held his arms a little way out from his sides and pushed forward
directly. He was halfway there when all at once his legs disappeared, or felt as if
they had. He looked down, bewildered, for they were still there. He fell forward
and grasped the banister post with both hands. Hanging there, he gazed for what
seemed the longest time he had ever looked at anything down the steep unlighted
steps; then he closed his eyes and pitched forward. He landed upside down in the
middle of the flight.
He felt presently the tilt of the box as they took it off the train and got it on the
baggage wagon. He made no noise yet. The train jarred and slid away. In a
moment the baggage wagon was rumbling under him, carrying him back to the
station side. He heard footsteps rattling closer and closer to him and he supposed
that a crowd was gathering. Wait until they see this, he thought.
“That him,” Coleman said, “one of his tricks.”
“It’s a dammrat in there,” Hooten said.
“It’s him. Git the crowbar.”
In a moment a shaft of greenish light fell on him. He pushed through it and
cried in a weak voice, “Judgement Day! Judgement Day!You idiots didn’t know it
was Judgement Day, did you?”
“Coleman?” he murmured.
The Negro bending over himhad a large surly mouth and sullen eyes.
“Ain’t any coal man, either,” he said. This must be the wrong station, Tanner
thought. Those fools put me off too soon. Who is this nigger? It ain’t even daylight
here.
At the Negro’s side was another face, a woman’s—pale, topped with a pile of
copper-glinting hair and twisted as if she had just stepped in a pile of dung.
“Oh,” Tanner said, “it’s you.”
The actor leaned closer and grasped him by the front of his shirt. “Judgement
day,” he said in a mocking voice. “Ain’t no judgement day, old man. Cept this.
Maybe this here judgement day for you.”
Tanner tried to catch hold of a banister-spoke to raise himself but his hand
grasped air. The two faces, the black one and the pale one, appeared to be
wavering. By an effort of will he kept them focused before him while he lifted his
hand, as light as a breath, and said in his jauntiest voice, “Hep me up, Preacher.
I’mon my way home!”
His daughter found him when she came in from the grocery store. His hat had
been pulled down over his face and his head and arms thrust between the spokes
of the banister; his feet dangled over the stairwell like those of a man in the
stocks. She tugged at him frantically and then flew for the police. They cut him out
with a saw and said he had been dead about an hour.
She buried himin New York City, but after she had done it she could not sleep
at night. Night after night she turned and tossed and very definite lines began to
appear in her face, so she had him dug up and shipped the body to Corinth. Now
she rests well at night and her good looks have mostly returned.