THEY PASSED THE DARK bulk of the cotton gin. Then they saw the lamplit house and
the other car, the doctor's coupe, just stopping at the gate, and they could hear the hound
baying.
 "Here we are!" the old deputy marshal said.
 "What's that other car?" the younger man said, the stranger, the state draft
investigator.
 "Doctor Schofield's," the marshal said. "Lee McCallum asked me to send him out
when I telephoned we were coming."
 "You mean you warned them?" the investigator said. "You telephoned ahead that
I was coming out with a warrant for these two evaders? Is this how you carry out the
orders of the United States Government?"
 The marshal was a lean, clean old man who chewed tobacco, who had been born
and lived in the county all his life.
 "I understood all you wanted was to arrest these two McCallum boys and bring
them back to town," he said.
 "It was!" the investigator said. "And now you have warned them, given them a
chance to run. Possibly put the Government to the expense of hunting them down with
troops. Have you forgotten that you are under a bond yourself?"
 "I ain't forgot it," the marshal said. "And ever since we left Jefferson I been trying
to tell you something for you not to forget. But I reckon it will take these McCallums to
impress that on you... Pull in behind the other car. We'll try to find out first just how sick
whoever it is that is sick is."
 The investigator drew up behind the other car and switched off and blacked out
his lights. "These people," he said. Then he thought, But this doddering, tobacco-chewing
old man is one of them, too, despite the honor and pride of his office, which should have
made him different. So he didn't speak it aloud, removing the keys and getting out of the
car, and then locking the car itself, rolling the windows up first, thinking, These people
who lie about and conceal the ownership of land and property in order to hold relief jobs
which they have no intention of performing, standing on their constitutional rights against
having to work, who jeopardize the very job itself through petty and transparent
subterfuge to acquire a free mattress which they intend to attempt to sell; who would
relinquish even the job, if by so doing they could receive free food and a place, any
rathole, in town to sleep in; who, as farmers, make false statements to get seed loans
which they will later misuse, and then react in loud vituperative outrage and astonishment
when caught at it. And then, when at long last a suffering and threatened Government
asks one thing of them in return, one thing simply, which is to put their names down on a
selective-service list, they refuse to do it.
 The old marshal had gone on. The investigator followed, through a stout paintless
gate in a picket fence, up a broad brick walk between two rows of old shabby cedars,
toward the rambling and likewise paintless sprawl of the two-story house in the open hall
of which the soft lamplight glowed and the lower story of which, as the investigator now
perceived, was of logs. He saw a hall full of soft lamplight beyond a stout paintless 
gallery running across the log front, from beneath which the same dog which they had
heard, a big hound, came booming again, to stand foursquare facing them in the walk,
bellowing, until a man's voice spoke to it from the house.
 He followed the marshal up the steps onto the gallery. Then he saw the man
standing in the door, waiting for them to approach: a man of about forty-five, not tall, but
blocky, with a brown, still face and horseman's hands, who looked at him once, brief and
hard, and then no more, speaking to the marshal, "Howdy, Mr. Gombault. Come in."
 "Howdy, Rafe," the marshal said. "Who's sick?"
 "Buddy," the other said. "Slipped and caught his leg in the hammer mill this
afternoon."
 "Is it bad?" the marshal said.
 "It looks bad to me," the other said. "That's why we sent for the doctor instead of
bringing him in to town. We couldn't get the bleeding stopped."
 "I'm sorry to hear that," the marshal said. "This is Mr. Pearson." Once more the
investigator found the other looking at him, the brown eyes still, courteous enough in the
brown face, the hand he offered hard enough, but the clasp quite limp, quite cold. The
marshal was still speaking. "From Jackson. From the draft board." Then he said, and the
investigator could discern no change whatever in his tone: "He's got a warrant for the
boys."
 The investigator could discern no change whatever anywhere. The limp hard hand
merely withdrew from his, the still face now looking at the marshal. "You mean we have
declared war?"
 "No," the marshal said.
 "That's not the question, Mr. McCallum," the investigator said. "All required of
them was to register. Their numbers might not even be drawn this time; under the law of
averages, they probably would not be. But they refused; failed, anyway to register."
 "I see," the other said. He was not looking at the investigator. The investigator
couldn't tell certainly if he was even looking at the marshal, although he spoke to him,
"You want to see Buddy? The doctor's with him now."
 "Wait," the investigator said. "I'm sorry about your brother's accident, but I..." The
marshal glanced back at him for a moment, his shaggy gray brows beetling, with
something at once courteous yet a little impatient about the glance, so that during the
instant the investigator sensed from the old marshal the same quality which had been in
the other's brief look. The investigator was a man of better than average intelligence; he
was already becoming aware of something a little different here from what he had
expected. But he had been in relief work in the state several years, dealing almost
exclusively with country people, so he still believed he knew them. So he looked at the
old marshal, thinking, Yes. The same sort of people, despite the office, the authority and
responsibility which should have changed him. Thinking again, These people. These
people. "I intend to take the night train back to Jackson," he said. "My reservation is
already made. Serve the warrant and we will "
 "Come along," the old marshal said. "We are going to have plenty of time."
 So he followed: there was nothing else to do fuming and seething, attempting in
the short length of the hall to regain control of himself in order to control the situation,
because he realized now that if the situation were controlled, it would devolve upon him
to control it; that if their departure with their prisoners were expedited, it must be himself 
and not the old marshal who would expedite it. He had been right. The doddering old
officer was not only at bottom one of these people, he had apparently been corrupted
anew to his old, inherent, shiftless sloth and unreliability merely by entering the house.
So he followed in turn, down the hall and into a bedroom; whereupon he looked about
him not only with amazement but with something very like terror. The room was a big
room, with a bare unpainted floor, and besides the bed, it contained only a chair or two
and one other piece of old-fashioned furniture. Yet to the investigator it seemed so filled
with tremendous men cast in the same mold as the man who had met them that the very
walls themselves must bulge. Yet they were not big, not tall, and it was not vitality,
exuberance, because they made no sound, merely looking quietly at him where he stood
in the door, with faces bearing an almost identical stamp of kinship: a thin, almost frail
old man of about seventy, slightly taller than the others; a second one, white-haired, too,
but otherwise identical with the man who had met them at the door; a third one about the
same age as the man who had met them, but with something delicate in his face and
something tragic and dark and wild in the same dark eyes; the two absolutely identical
blue-eyed youths; and lastly the blue-eyed man on the bed over which the doctor, who
might have been any city doctor, in his neat city suit, leaned: all of them turning to look
quietly at him and the marshal as they entered. And he saw, past the doctor, the slit
trousers of the man on the bed and the exposed, bloody, mangled leg, and he turned sick,
stopping just inside the door under that quiet, steady regard while the marshal went up to
the man who lay on the bed, smoking a cob pipe, a big, old-fashioned, wicker-covered
demijohn, such as the investigator's grandfather had kept his whisky in, on the table
beside him.
 "Well, Buddy," the marshal said, "this is bad."
 "Ah, it was my own damn fault," the man on the bed said. "Stuart kept warning
me about that frame I was using."
 "That's correct," the second old one said.
 Still the others said nothing. They just looked steadily and quietly at the
investigator until the marshal turned slightly and said, "This is Mr. Pearson. From
Jackson. He's got a warrant for the boys."
 Then the man on the bed said, "What for?"
 "That draft business, Buddy," the marshal said.
 "We're not at war now," the man on the bed said.
 "No," the marshal said. "It's that new law. They didn't register."
 "What are you going to do with them?"
 "It's a warrant, Buddy. Swore out."
 "That means jail."
 "It's a warrant," the old marshal said. Then the investigator saw that the man on
the bed was watching him, puffing steadily at the pipe.
 "Pour me some whisky, Jackson," he said.
 "No," the doctor said. "He's had too much already."
 "Pour me some whisky, Jackson," the man on the bed said. He puffed steadily at
the pipe, looking at the investigator. "You come from the Government?" he said.
 "Yes," the investigator said. "They should have registered. That's all required of
them yet. They did not..." His voice ceased, while the seven pairs of eyes contemplated
him, and the man on the bed puffed steadily. 
 "We would have still been here," the man on the bed said. "We wasn't going to
run." He turned his head. The two youths were standing side by side at the foot of the
bed.
 "Anse, Lucius," he said.
 To the investigator it sounded as if they answered as one, "Yes, father."
 "This gentleman has come all the way from Jackson to say the Government is
ready for you. I reckon the quickest place to enlist will be Memphis. Go upstairs and
pack."
 The investigator started, moved forward. "Wait!" he cried.
 But Jackson, the eldest, had forestalled him. He said, "Wait," also, and now they
were not looking at the investigator. They were looking at the doctor.
 "What about his leg?" Jackson said.
 "Look at it," the doctor said. "He almost amputated it himself. It won't wait. And
he can't be moved now. I'll need my nurse to help me, and some ether, provided he hasn't
had too much whisky to stand the anesthetic too. One of you can drive to town in my car.
I'll telephone "
 "Ether?" the man on the bed said. "What for? You just said yourself it's pretty
near off now. I could whet up one of Jackson's butcher knives and finish it myself, with
another drink or two. Go on. Finish it."
 "You couldn't stand any more shock," the doctor said.
 "This is whisky talking now."
 "Shucks," the other said. "One day in France we was running through a wheat
field and I saw the machine gun, coming across the wheat, and I tried to jump it like you
would jump a fence rail somebody was swinging at your middle, only I never made it.
And I was on the ground then, and along toward dark that begun to hurt, only about that
time something went whang on the back of my helmet, like when you hit a anvil, so I
never knowed nothing else until I woke up. There was a heap of us racked up along a
bank outside a field dressing station, only it took a long time for the doctor to get around
to all of us, and by that time it was hurting bad. This here ain't hurt none to speak of since
I got a-holt of this johnny-jug. You go on and finish it. If it's help you need, Stuart and
Rafe will help you... Pour me a drink, Jackson."
 This time the doctor raised the demijohn and examined the level of the liquor.
"There's a good quart gone," he said. "If you've drunk a quart of whisky since four
o'clock, I doubt if you could stand the anesthetic. Do you think you could stand it if I
finished it now?"
 "Yes, finish it. I've ruined it; I want to get shut of it."
 The doctor looked about at the others, at the still, identical faces watching him. "If
I had him in town, in the hospital, with a nurse to watch him, I'd probably wait until he
got over this first shock and got the whisky out of his system. But he can't be moved now,
and I can't stop the bleeding like this, and even if I had ether or a local anesthetic..."
 "Shucks," the man on the bed said. "God never made no better local nor general
comfort or anesthetic neither than what's in this johnny-jug. And this ain't Jackson's leg
nor Stuart's nor Rafe's nor Lee's. It's mine. I done started it; I reckon I can finish cutting it
off any way I want to."
 But the doctor was still looking at Jackson. "Well, Mr. McCallum?" he said.
"You're the oldest." 
 But it was Stuart who answered. "Yes," he said. "Finish it. What do you want?
Hot water, I reckon."
 "Yes," the doctor said. "Some clean sheets. Have you got a big table you can
move in here?"
 "The kitchen table," the man who had met them at the door said. "Me and the
boys..."
 "Wait," the man on the bed said. "The boys won't have time to help you." He
looked at them again. "Anse, Lucius," he said.
 Again it seemed to the investigator that they answered as one, "Yes, father."
 "This gentleman yonder is beginning to look impatient. You better start. Come to
think of it, you won't need to pack. You will have uniforms in a day or two. Take the
truck. There won't be nobody to drive you to Memphis and bring the truck back, so you
can leave it at the Gayoso Feed Company until we can send for it. I'd like for you to enlist
into the old Sixth Infantry, where I used to be. But I reckon that's too much to hope, and
you'll just have to chance where they send you. But it likely won't matter, once you are
in. The Government done right by me in my day, and it will do right by you. You just
enlist wherever they want to send you, need you, and obey your sergeants and officers
until you find out how to be soldiers. Obey them, but remember your name and don't take
nothing from no man. You can go now."
 "Wait!" the investigator cried again; again he started, moved forward into the
center of the room. "I protest this! I'm sorry about Mr. McCallum's accident. I'm sorry
about the whole business. But it's out of my hands and out of his hands now. This charge,
failure to register according to law, has been made and the warrant issued. It cannot be
evaded this way. The course of the action must be completed before any other step can be
taken. They should have thought of this when these boys failed to register. If Mr.
Gombault refuses to serve this warrant, I will serve it myself and take these men back to
Jefferson with me to answer this charge as made. And I must warn Mr. Gombault that he
will be cited for contempt!"
 The old marshal turned, his shaggy eyebrows beetling again, speaking down to
the investigator as if he were a child, "Ain't you found out yet that me or you neither ain't
going nowhere for a while?"
 "What?" the investigator cried. He looked about at the grave faces once more
contemplating him with that remote and speculative regard. "Am I being threatened?" he
cried.
 "Ain't anybody paying any attention to you at all," the marshal said. "Now you
just be quiet for a while, and you will be all right, and after a while we can go back to
town."
 So he stopped again and stood while the grave, contemplative faces freed him
once more of that impersonal and unbearable regard, and saw the two youths approach
the bed and bend down in turn and kiss their father on the mouth, and then turn as one
and leave the room, passing him without even looking at him. And sitting in the lamplit
hall beside the old marshal, the bedroom door closed now, he heard the truck start up and
back and turn and go down the road, the sound of it dying away, ceasing, leaving the still,
hot night, the Mississippi Indian summer, which had already outlasted half of November
filled with the loud last shrilling of the summer's cicadas, as though they, too, were aware
of the imminent season of cold weather and of death. 
 "I remember old Anse," the marshal said pleasantly, chattily, in that tone in which
an adult addresses a strange child.
 "He's been dead fifteen-sixteen years now. He was about sixteen when the old war
broke out, and he walked all the way to Virginia to get into it. He could have enlisted and
fought right here at home, but his ma was a Carter, so wouldn't nothing do him but to go
all the way back to Virginia to do his fighting, even though he hadn't never seen Virginia
before himself; walked all the way back to a land he hadn't never even seen before and
enlisted in Stonewall Jackson's army and stayed in it all through the Valley, and right up
to Chancellorsville, where them Carolina boys shot Jackson by mistake, and right on up
to that morning in 'Sixty-five when Sheridan's cavalry blocked the road from Appomattox
to the Valley, where they might have got away again. And he walked back to Mississippi
with just about what he had carried away with him when he left, and he got married and
built the first story of this house this here log story we're in right now and started getting
them boys Jackson and Stuart and Raphael and Lee and Buddy. Buddy come along late,
late enough to be in the other war, in France in it. You heard him in there. He brought
back two medals, an American medal and a French one, and no man knows till yet how
he got them, just what he done. I don't believe he even told Jackson and Stuart and them.
He hadn't hardly got back home, with them numbers on his uniform and the wound
stripes and them two medals, before he had found him a girl, found her right off, and a
year later them twin boys was born, the livin', spittin' image of old Anse McCallum. If
old Anse had just been about seventy-five years younger, the three of them might have
been thriblets. I remember them two little critters exactly alike, and wild as spikehorn
bucks, running around here day and night both with a pack of coon dogs until they got
big enough to help Buddy and Stuart and Lee with the farm and the gin, and Rafe with
the horses and mules, when he would breed and raise and train them and take them to
Memphis to sell, right on up to three, four years back, when they went to the agricultural
college for a year to learn more about whiteface cattle.
 "That was after Buddy and them had quit raising cotton. I remember that too. It
was when the Government first begun to interfere with how a man farmed his own land,
raised his cotton. Stabilizing the price, using up the surplus, they called it, giving a man
advice and help, whether he wanted it or not. You may have noticed them boys in yonder
tonight; curious folks almost, you might call them. That first year, when county agents
was trying to explain the new system to farmers, the agent come out here and tried to
explain it to Buddy and Lee and Stuart, explaining how they would cut down the crop,
but that the Government would pay farmers the difference, and so they would actually be
better off than trying to farm by themselves.
 "'Why, we're much obliged,' Buddy says. 'But we don't need no help. We'll just
make the cotton like we always done; if we can't make a crop of it, that will just be our
lookout and our loss, and we'll try again.'
 "So they wouldn't sign no papers nor no cards nor nothing. They just went on and
made the cotton like old Anse had taught them to; it was like they just couldn't believe
that the Government aimed to help a man whether he wanted help or not, aimed to
interfere with how much of anything he could make by hard work on his own land,
making the crop and ginning it right here in their own gin, like they had always done, and
hauling it to town to sell, hauling it all the way into Jefferson before they found out they
couldn't sell it because, in the first place, they had made too much of it and, in the second 
place, they never had no card to sell what they would have been allowed. So they hauled
it back. The gin wouldn't hold all of it, so they put some of it under Rafe's mule shed and
they put the rest of it right here in the hall where we are setting now, where they would
have to walk around it all winter and keep themselves reminded to be sho and fill out that
card next time.
 "Only next year they didn't fill out no papers neither. It was like they still couldn't
believe it, still believed in the freedom and liberty to make or break according to a man's
fitness and will to work, guaranteed by the Government that old Anse had tried to tear in
two once and failed, and admitted in good faith he had failed and taken the consequences,
and that had give Buddy a medal and taken care of him when he was far away from home
in a strange land and hurt.
 "So they made that second crop. And they couldn't sell it to nobody neither
because they never had no cards. This time they built a special shed to put it under, and I
remember how in that second winter Buddy come to town one day to see Lawyer Gavin
Stevens. Not for legal advice how to sue the Government or somebody into buying the
cotton, even if they never had no card for it, but just to find out why. 'I was for going
ahead and signing up for it,' Buddy says. 'If that's going to be the new rule. But we talked
it over, and Jackson ain't no farmer, but he knowed father longer than the rest of us, and
he said father would have said no, and I reckon now he would have been right.'
 "So they didn't raise any more cotton; they had a plenty of it to last a while:
twenty-two bales, I think it was. That was when they went into whiteface cattle, putting
old Anse's cotton land into pasture, because that's what he would have wanted them to do
if the only way they could raise cotton was by the Government telling them how much
they could raise and how much they could sell it for, and where, and when, and then pay
them for not doing the work they didn't do. Only even when they didn't raise cotton,
every year the county agent's young fellow would come out to measure the pasture crops
they planted so he could pay them for that, even if they never had no not-cotton to be
paid for. Except that he never measured no crop on this place. 'You're welcome to look at
what we are doing,' Buddy says. 'But don't draw it down on your map.'
 "'But you can get money for this,' the young fellow says. 'The Government wants
to pay you for planting all this.'
 "'We are aiming to get money for it,' Buddy says. 'When we can't, we will try
something else. But not from the Government. Give that to them that want to take it. We
can make out.'
 "And that's about all. Them twenty-two bales of orphan cotton are down yonder in
the gin right now, because there's room for it in the gin now because they ain't using the
gin no more. And them boys grew up and went off a year to the agricultural college to
learn right about whiteface cattle, and then come back to the rest of them: these here
curious folks living off here to themselves, with the rest of the world all full of pretty
neon lights burning night and day both, and easy, quick money scattering itself around
everywhere for any man to grab a little, and every man with a shiny new automobile
already wore out and throwed away and the new one delivered before the first one was
even paid for, and everywhere a fine loud grabble and snatch of AAA and WPA and a
dozen other three-letter reasons for a man not to work. Then this here draft comes along,
and these curious folks ain't got around to signing that neither, and you come all the way 
up from Jackson with your paper all signed and regular, and we come out here, and after
a while we can go back to town. A man gets around, don't he?"
 "Yes," the investigator said. "Do you suppose we can go back to town now?"
 "No," the marshal told him in that same kindly tone, "not just yet. But we can
leave after a while. Of course you will miss your train. But there will be another one
tomorrow."
 He rose, though the investigator had heard nothing. The investigator watched him
go down the hall and open the bedroom door and enter and close it behind him. The
investigator sat quietly, listening to the night sounds and looking at the closed door until
it opened presently and the marshal came back, carrying something in a bloody sheet,
carrying it gingerly.
 "Here," he said. "Hold it a minute."
 "It's bloody," the investigator said.
 "That's all right," the marshal said. "We can wash when we get through." So the
investigator took the bundle and stood holding it while he watched the old marshal go
back down the hall and on through it and vanish and return presently with a lighted
lantern and a shovel. "Come along," he said. "We're pretty near through now."
 The investigator followed him out of the house and across the yard, carrying
gingerly the bloody, shattered, heavy bundle in which it still seemed to him he could feel
some warmth of life, the marshal striding on ahead, the lantern swinging against his leg,
the shadow of his striding scissoring and enormous along the earth, his voice still coming
back over his shoulder, chatty and cheerful, "Yes, sir. A man gets around and he sees a
heap; a heap of folks in a heap of situations. The trouble is, we done got into the habit of
confusing the situations with the folks. Take yourself, now," he said in that same kindly
tone, chatty and easy; "you mean all right. You just went and got yourself all fogged up
with rules and regulations. That's our trouble. We done invented ourselves so many
alphabets and rules and recipes that we can't see anything else; if what we see can't be
fitted to an alphabet or a rule, we are lost. We have come to be like critters doctor folks
might have created in laboratories, that have learned how to slip off their bones and guts
and still live, still be kept alive indefinite and forever maybe even without even knowing
the bones and the guts are gone. We have slipped our backbone; we have about decided a
man don't need a backbone any more; to have one is old-fashioned. But the groove where
the backbone used to be is still there, and the backbone has been kept alive, too, and
someday we're going to slip back onto it. I don't know just when nor just how much of a
wrench it will take to teach us, but someday."
 They had left the yard now. They were mounting a slope; ahead of them the
investigator could see another clump of cedars, a small clump, somehow shaggily formal
against the starred sky. The marshal entered it and stopped and set the lantern down and,
following with the bundle, the investigator saw a small rectangle of earth enclosed by a
low brick coping. Then he saw the two graves, or the headstones: two plain granite slabs
set upright in the earth.
 "Old Anse and Mrs. Anse," the marshal said. "Buddy's wife wanted to be buried
with her folks. I reckon she would have been right lonesome up here with just
McCallums. Now, let's see." He stood for a moment, his chin in his hand; to the
investigator he looked exactly like an old lady trying to decide where to set out a shrub.
"They was to run from left to right, beginning with Jackson. But after the boys was born, 
Jackson and Stuart was to come up here by their pa and ma, so Buddy could move up
some and make room. So he will be about here." He moved the lantern nearer and took
up the shovel. Then he saw the investigator still holding the bundle.
 "Set it down," he said. "I got to dig first."
 "I'll hold it," the investigator said.
 "Nonsense, put it down." the marshal said. "Buddy won't mind."
 So the investigator put the bundle down on the brick coping and the marshal
began to dig, skillfully and rapidly, still talking in that cheerful, interminable voice, "Yes,
sir. We done forgot about folks. Life has done got cheap, and life ain't cheap. Life's a
pretty durn valuable thing. I don't mean just getting along from one WPA relief check to
the next one, but honor and pride and discipline that make a man worth preserving, make
him of any value. That's what we got to learn again. Maybe it takes trouble, bad trouble,
to teach it back to us; maybe it was the walking to Virginia because that's where his ma
come from, and losing a war and then walking back, that taught it to old Anse. Anyway,
he seems to learned it, and to learned it good enough to bequeath it to his boys. Did you
notice how all Buddy had to do was to tell them boys of his it was time to go, because the
Government had sent them word? And how they told him good-by? Growned men
kissing one another without hiding and without shame. Maybe that's what I am trying to
say... There." he said. "That's big enough."
 He moved quickly, easily; before the investigator could stir, he had lifted the
bundle into the narrow trench and was covering it, covering it as rapidly as he had dug,
smoothing the earth over it with the shovel. Then he stood up and raised the lantern a tall,
lean old man, breathing easily and lightly.
 "I reckon we can go back to town now," he said. 