IT was an afternoon of rain, and lamps lighted against the grey. For a long while the two sisters
had been in the dining-room. One of them, Juliet, embroidered tablecloths; the youngest, Anna,
sat quietly on the window-seat, staring out at the dark street and the dark sky, her brow against
the pane.
 Anna did not move her head, but her lips moved and after thinking a long moment, she said, 'I
never thought of that before.'
 'Of what?' asked Juliet.
 'It just came to me. There's actually a city under a city. A dead city, right here, right under our
feet.'
 Juliet poked her needle in and out the white cloth. 'Come away from the window. That rain's
done something to you.'
 'No, really. Didn't you ever think of the cisterns before? They're all through the town, there's
one for every street and you can walk in them without bumping your head and they go
everywhere and finally go down to the sea,' said Anna, fascinated with the rain on the asphalt
pavement out there and the rain falling from the sky and vanishing into sewer mouths at each
corner of the distant cross-section. 'Wouldn't you like to live in a cistern?'
 'I would not!'
 'But wouldn't it be fun; I mean, very secret, to live in the cistern and peek up at people through
the slots and see them and them not see you? It's a nice goose-pimply, rainy-day feeling like
when you were a child and played hide-and-seek and nobody found you and there you were in
their midst all the time, all sheltered and hidden and warm and excited. I'd like that. I like to fool
people. That's what it must be like to live in the cistern.'
 Juliet looked slowly up from her work. 'You are my sister, aren't you, Anna? You were born,
weren't you? Sometimes, the way you talk, I think mother found you under a tree one day and
brought you home and planted you in a pot and grew you to this size and there you are, and
you'll never change.'
 Anna didn't reply, so Juliet went back to her needle. There was no colour in the room; neither
of the two sisters added any colour to it. Anna held her head to the window for five minutes.
Then she looked like she had made a decision, she looked way off into the distance and said, 'I
guess you'd call it a dream. While I've been here, the last hour, I mean. Thinking. Yes, it was a
dream.'
 Now it was Juliet's turn not to answer.
 Anna whispered. 'All this water put me to sleep awhile, I guess, and then I began to think
about the rain and where it came from and where it went and how it went down those little slots 
in the curb, and then I thought about deep under and suddenly there they were. A man, and a —
woman. Down in that cistern, under the road.'
 'What would they be doing there?' asked Juliet.
 Anna said, 'Must they have a reason?' 'No, not if they're insane, no,' said Juliet, 'in that case no
reasons are necessary, there they are in their cistern and let them stay.' 'But they weren't just in
the cistern,' said Anna, knowingly, her head to one side, her eyes moving under the half-down
lids. 'No, they were in love, these two.' 'For heaven's sake,' said Juliet, 'did they crawl down there
to make love?' 'No, they've been there for years and years,' said Anna. 'You can't tell me they've
been in that cistern for years, living together,' protested Juliet. 'Did I say they were alive?' asked
Anna, surprised. 'Oh, but no. They're dead.'
 The rain scrambled in wild pushing pellets down the window. Drops came and joined with
others and made streaks.
 'Oh,' said Juliet.
 'Yes,' said Anna, pleasantly. 'Dead. He's dead and she's dead.' This seemed to satisfy her, it
was a nice discovery and she was proud of it. 'He looks like a very lonely man who never
travelled in all his life.'
 'How do you know?'
 'He looks like the kind of man who never travelled, but wanted to. You know by his eyes.
Travelling eyes in a sick body.'
 'You know what he looks like, then?'
 'Yes. Very ill and very handsome. You know how it is with a man made handsome by illness?
Illness brings out the bones in the face.'
 'And he's dead?' asked the older sister.
 'For five years.' Anna talked slowly, with her eyelids rising and lowering in gentle pulsations,
as if she were about to tell a long story and knew it and wanted to work into it slowly, and then
faster and then faster, until the very momentum of the story would carry her on, with her eyes
wide and her lips parted. But now it was slowly, with only a slight fever to the telling. 'Five years
ago this man was walking along a street and he knew he'd been walking the same street on many
nights and he'd go on walking them, so he came to a manhole cover, one of those big iron
waffles in the centre of the street, and he heard the river rushing under his feet, under the metal
cover, rushing towards the sea, towards other places and things.' She put out her right hand. 'And
he bent slowly and lifted up the cistern lid and looked down at the rushing foam and the water,
and he thought of someone he wanted to love and couldn't, and then he swung himself down in
on the iron rungs and walked down them until he was all gone save his hand drawing the lid shut
after him and the rain hit on the lid for all the rest of the night. . .'
 'And what about her?' asked Juliet, busy. 'When'd she die?'
 'I'm not sure. She's new. She's just dead, now. But she is dead. Beautifully, beautifully dead.'
She admitted the image she had in her mind. 'It takes death to make a woman really beautiful,
and it takes death by drowning to make her most beautiful of all. Then all the stiffness is taken
out of her and her hair hangs upon the water like a drift of smoke. And her arms and legs and her
fingers move in the water with such slow purposelessness and she's very water-elegant and
water-graceful. There's not a clumsy move in her as she hangs in the water. She turns every once
in a while to read passing newspapers with unseeing eyes.' Anna nodded her head, amusedly. 'All
the schools and etiquettes and teachings in the world can't make a woman move with this dreamy
ease, supple and ripply, and fine.' She tried to show how fine, how ripply, how graceful, with her 
broad, coarse hand, but it was more a jerking than a lazy gesture. She put her hand down and did
not try to show how again for another full five minutes.
 'He's been waiting for her, for five years. But she didn't know where he was, until now. So
there they are, and will be, from now on! In the wet season they'll live. But, in the dry seasons,
that's sometimes months, they'll have long rest-periods, they'll lie in little hidden niches, under
the drains, like those Japanese water flowers, all dry and compact and old and quiet.'
 Juliet got up and turned on yet another little lamp in the corner of the dining-room. 'I wish you
wouldn't talk about it.'
 Anna laughed. 'But let me tell you about how it starts, how they come to life, when the rainy
season comes. I've got it all worked.' She bent forward, held on to her knees, intensely interested,
staring at the street and the rain and the cistern mouths. 'There they are, down under, dry and
quiet, and up above the sky gets electrical and powdery and the clouds look dark and soon the
rain comes down!' She threw back her dull, grey-brown hair with one hand. 'At first all the upper
world is pellets. Street cars run by all pimply. Then there's lightning and the thunder and the dry
season is over, and the little pellets run along the gutters and get big and fall into the drains. They
take gum-wrappers and cigarettes and theatre tickets with them, and bus-transfers!'
 'Come away from that window, now.'
 Anna made a square with her hands and imagined things. 'I know just what it's like under the
pavement, in the big square cistern. It's huge. It's all empty from the weeks with nothing but
sunshine. It's empty and it echoes if you talk. The only sound you can hear standing down there
is an auto passing above. Far up above. The whole cistern is like a dry hollow camelbone in a
desert, waiting. I bet the whole floor of the canal is pasted and mashed flat with old circus
banners and newspapers about 1936 and 1940 and the war and the movie star who died.'
 She lifted her hand, pointing, as if she herself were down in the cistern, waiting.
 'Now — a little trickle. It comes down on the floor. It's like something was hurt and bleeding
up in the outer world. There's some thunder! Or was it a truck going by?'
 She spoke a little more rapidly now, but held her body very relaxed against the window with
the rain streaking the glass, breathing out and in the next words she wanted to say:
 'It seeps down. Then, in all the other hollows come other seepages. Little twines and snakes.
Tobacco-stained water. It makes puddles. Then it — moves. It joins others. It makes snakes and
then one big constrictor which rolls along on the flat-papered floor, with a majestic movement.
From everywhere, from the north and south, from other streets, other streams come and they join
and make one hissing and shining of coils.
 'The cistern's full, from wall to wall, and it turns towards the ocean and the gravity pull of the
ocean! There are little tidal swirls. And ten thousand drains drop down all kinds of undigested
water, paper and muck. And the water gets into those two little dry niches I told you about. It
rises slowly around those two dry people lying like Japanese water-flowers there, dead.'
 She clasped her hands, slowly, working finger into finger, interlacing.
 'The water soaks into them. First, it lifts the woman's hand. In a little move. Her hand's the
only live part of her. Then her arm lifts and one foot. And her hair — ' She touched her own hair
as it hung about her shoulders. ' — unloosens and opens out like a flower in the water. Her shut
eyelids are blue. . .'
 The room got darker, Juliet sewed on, and Anna talked and told all she saw in her mind. She
told how the water rose and took the woman with it, unfolding her out and loosening her and
standing her full upright in the cistern, the dead woman not caring. 'The water is interested in the
woman, and she lets it have its way. All morals come from outside to her. After a long time of
lying still, and being stiff, she's ready to live again, any life the water wants her to have.'
 Somewhere else, the man stood up in the water also. And Anna told of that, and how the water
carried him slowly, drifting, and her, drifting, until they met each other.
 'The water opens their eyes. Now they can see but not see each other. They circle, not touching
yet.' Anna made a little slow circle of her head, eyes closed. 'They watch each other and the only
muscles they've got are made by the water. They glow with some kind of phosphorus. They
smile.
 'They — touch hands.'
 Anna hesitated, took in a long breath, lingered over the thought, putting the tips of her right
hand against the fingers of her left.
 'The tide — makes them touch. They bump. They go away. They bump again. It's gentle. First,
hands. Then, feet. Then — bodies.'
 At last, Juliet, stiffening, put down her sewing and stared at her sister, across the grey, rainsilent room.
 'They circle,' whispered Anna, softly, slowly, her fingers trailing in the air. 'They bump,
gently. They turn. Twist. Their heads bump and their lips bump softly. A lot of times, and their
long white bodies bump and bump gently.'
 'Anna!'
 'They float over and they float under each other. The tide comes and puts them together. Then,
away again. Back and forth.' She showed how with her hands. 'It's a perfect kind of love, with no
ego to it, only two bodies, moved by the water, which makes it clean and all right. It's not
wicked, this way.'
 'It's bad your saying it!' cried her sister.
 'No, it's all right,' insisted Anna, turning for an instant. 'They're not ‘thinking,' are they?
They're just so deep down and quiet and not caring. Like children in a bath.'
 She took her right hand and held it over her left hand very slowly and gently, quavering and
interweaving them for one another. The rainy window, with the dull autumn light penetrating,
put a movement of light and running water on her fingers, made them seem submerged, fathoms
deep in grey water, running one about the other as she finished her little dream:
 'Him, tall and quiet, his hands open,' she showed with a gesture how tall and how easy he was
in the water. 'Her, small and quiet and relaxed.' She drifted the hands in a slow pressure one upon
the other. 'Both of them so wonderful about it, not hurrying, knowing that they've all the time in
the world.' The two hands hung in mid-air, her face fascinated over them. She looked at her
sister, leaving her hands just that way. 'Love's always better when it's long and careful and not
rushed. They can be long and careful here, because no one sees them, there's no one to yell at
them or criticize. Nobody can walk in on them. Except little bits of paper floating, or a magazine.
And — why, even if somebody did happen in on them — they're dead!'
 She seemed very pleased to have rediscovered this aspect of the situation. She looked at her
white hands. 'They're dead, with no place to go, and no one to tell them. They just wouldn't pay
attention if people looked at them and said ‘Look! A man and a woman, no clothing on, in the
water, isn't that awful!'' She laughed softly. 'They'd just go on being in the water, circling each
other carelessly, no matter how people talked or stared, no matter which people, mothers or
fathers, even, or sisters.' She jerked her head at her sister. 'Remember that child rhyme? how'd it
go? ‘Scoldings don't hurt, Lickings don't last, And kill me you dassn't!' Only with this man and
this woman it's ‘Resurrect us you dassn't!' They'd have to be resurrected, have to be made alive 
before any one could tell them they were wicked and wrong. And nobody could do that, it's too
late. That's the beauty of it!
 'So there they are, with nothing applying to them and no worries, very secret and hidden under
the earth in the cistern waters, going around and about. They touch their hands and lips and when
they come into a cross-street outlet of the cistern the tide rushes them together and they burn cold
in the water!' She clapped her hands together. 'They're crushed against a wall. They stay that
way, one against the other, for maybe an hour, with the tide moving them in little fine moves and
everything beautiful. Then, later. . .' She disengaged her hands, '. . . maybe they travel together,
hand in hand, hobbling and floating, carefree and relaxed, down all the streets, doing little crazy
upright dances when they're caught in sudden swirls, her like white fire, him the same.' She
whirled her hands about; a drenching of rain spattered the window. 'And they go down to the sea,
all across the town, past cross-drain and cross-drain, street and street. Genesee Avenue,
Crenshaw, Edmond Place, Washington, Motor City, Ocean Side and then the ocean and the
travelling. They can go anywhere they want, all over the earth, on a deep siphon, and come back
later, to the cistern inlet and swim back up under the town, under a dozen tobacco shops and four
dozen liquor stores, and six dozen groceries and ten theatres, a rail junction, Highway 101, under
the walking feet of thirty thousand people who don't even know or think of the cistern.'
 Anna's voice drifted and dreamed and grew quiet again.
 'And then — the day passes and the thunder goes away upon the street. The rain stops. The
rainy season's over. The tunnels drip and stop. The tide goes down.' She seemed disappointed,
sad it was over. 'The river runs out to the ocean. The man and woman feel the water leave them
slowly to the floor. They settle.' She lowered her hands in little bobblings towards her lap,
watching them fixedly, longingly. 'Their feet touch and their feet lose the life the water has given
them from outside. Their knees touch, and their hips and now the water lays them down, side by
side, and drains away and the tunnels are drying. There are just little puddles and wet papers.
And there they lie. With little, contented smiles. They don't move and they're not ashamed. Like
two children they lie there with the water all gone and their skin drying. They barely touch. Up
above, in the world, the sun comes out. There they lie, in the darkness, sleeping, until the next
time. Until the next rain.'
 Her hands were now upon her lap, palms up and open. 'Nice man, nice woman,' she
murmured. She bowed her head over them and shut her eyes tight.
 Suddenly, Anna sat up and glared at her sister. 'Do you know who the man is?' she shouted,
bitterly.
 Juliet did not reply, she had watched, stricken, for the past five minutes while this thing went
on. Her mouth was twisted and pale. Anna almost screamed:
 'The man is Frank, that's who he is! And I'm the woman!'
 'Anna!'
 'Yes, it's Frank, down there!'
 'But Frank's been gone for years, and certainly not down there, Anna!'
 Now, Anna was talking to nobody, and to everybody, to Juliet, to the window, the wall, the
street. 'Poor Frank,' she cried. 'I know that's where he went. He couldn't stay anywhere in the
world. His mother spoiled him for all the world! So he saw the cistern and saw how secret and
fine it was, and how it went down to the ocean and everywhere in the world, and it was like
going back to his mother's womb where it was nice and secret and nobody criticized. Oh, poor
Frank. And poor Anna, poor me, with only a sister. God, Julie, how'd we get this way and why
didn't I take Frank when he was here! But if I had held on to him he'd have been revolted and so 
would I, and Frank would have been shocked and frightened and run off like a little boy, and I'd
have hated him if he had touched me. Christ, Julie, what good are we!'
 'Stop it, this minute, do you hear, this minute!'
 'It's rained three days, and all the time I sat here, and thought. And when I got the idea of
Frank, down there, I know it was the place for him, and when I turned on the tap in the kitchen I
heard him calling from deep in the cistern, up the long metal piping, calling and calling. And
when I bathed this morning he looked out from the little grille in the tube and saw me. I soaped
myself to hide myself! I saw his eye shining behind the grille!'
 'A soap bubble,' said Juliet frantically.
 'No, an eye.'
 'A drop of water.'
 'No, Frank's eye!'
 'A piece of metal, a nut or a bolt.'
 'Frank's lovely, seeing eye!'
 'Anna!'
 Anna slumped down into the corner, by the window, one hand up on it, and wept silently. A
few minutes later she heard her sister say, 'Are you finished?'
 'What!'
 'If you're done, come help me finish this, I'll be forever at it.'
 Anna raised her head, all pale, all expressionless. Juliet looked upon her with gentle
impatience. An impatience so gently all-pervading one could not fight it. There was nothing to
get hold of, or fight. It was just a continuing, gentle, tolerant impatience, year on year, year on
year.
 Anna rose and glided to her sister. 'What do you want me to do?' she sighed.
 'This and this,' said Juliet, showing her. 'All right,' said Anna, and took it and sat by the cold
window timing the rain, and moving her fingers with the needle and thread but knowing how
dark the street now was, and how dark the room, and how hard to see the round metal top of the
cistern now, there were just little midnight gleams and glitters out there in the black black late
afternoon. Lightning crackled over the sky, in a web.
 Half an hour passed. Juliet drowsed in her chair across the room, removed her glasses, placed
them down with her work and for a moment rested her head back and dozed. Perhaps thirty
seconds later, she heard the front door open violently, heard the wind come in, heard the
footsteps run down the walk, turn, and hurry along the black street.
 'What?' asked Juliet, sitting up, fumbling for her glasses. 'Who's there? Anna, did someone
come in the door?' She stared at the empty window-seat where Anna had been. 'Anna!' she cried.
She sprang up and ran out into the hall.
 The front door stood open, rain fell through it in a fine mist.
 'She's only gone out for a run,' said Juliet, standing there, trying to peer into the wet blackness.
'She'll be right back. Won't you be right back, Anna dear? Anna, answer me, you will be right
back, won't you, my dear sister?'
 Outside, the cistern lid rose and slammed down.
 The rain whispered on the street and fell upon the dropped shut lid all the rest of the night. 