Jonathan Iwegbu counted himself extra-ordinarily lucky. 'Happy survival!' meant so
much more to him than just a current fashion of greeting old friends in the first hazy days
of peace. It went deep to his heart. He had come out of the war with five inestimable
blessings--his head, his wife Maria's head and the heads of three out of their four
children. As a bonus he also had his old bicycle--a miracle too but naturally not to be
compared to the safety of five human heads.
 The bicycle had a little history of its own. One day at the height of the war it was
commandeered 'for urgent military action'. Hard as its loss would have been to him he
would still have let it go without a thought had he not had some doubts about the
genuineness of the officer. It wasn't his disreputable rags, nor the toes peeping out of one
blue and one brown canvas shoes, nor yet the two stars of his rank done obviously in a
hurry in biro, that troubled Jonathan; many good and heroic soldiers looked the same or
worse. It was rather a certain lack of grip and firmness in his manner. So Jonathan,
suspecting he might be amenable to influence, rummaged in his raffia bag and produced
the two pounds with which he had been going to buy firewood which his wife, Maria,
retailed to camp officials for extra stock-fish and corn meal, and got his bicycle back.
That night he buried it in the little clearing in the bush where the dead of the camp,
including his own youngest son, were buried. When he dug it up again a year later after
the surrender all it needed was a little palm-oil greasing. 'Nothing puzzles God,' he said in
wonder.
 He put it to immediate use as a taxi and accumulated a small pile of Biafran
money ferrying camp officials and their families across the four-mile stretch to the
nearest tarred road. His standard charge per trip was six pounds and those who had the
money were only glad to be rid of some of it in this way. At the end of a fortnight he had
made a small fortune of one hundred and fifteen pounds.
 Then he made the journey to Enugu and found another miracle waiting for him. It
was unbelievable. He rubbed his eyes and looked again and it was still standing there
before him. But, needless to say, even that monumental blessing must be accounted also
totally inferior to the five heads in the family. This newest miracle was his little house in
Ogui Overside. Indeed nothing puzzles God! Only two houses away a huge concrete
edifice some wealthy contractor had put up just before the war was a mountain of rubble.
And here was Jonathan's little zinc house of no regrets built with mud blocks quite intact!
Of course the doors and windows were missing and five sheets off the roof.
 But what was that? And anyhow he had returned to Enugu early enough to pick
up bits of old zinc and wood and soggy sheets of cardboard lying around the
neighbourhood before thousands more came out of their forest holes looking for the same
things. He got a destitute carpenter with one old hammer, a blunt plane and a few bent
and rusty nails in his tool bag to turn this assortment of wood, paper and metal into door
and window shutters for five Nigerian shillings or fifty Biafran pounds. He paid the
pounds, and moved in with his overjoyed family carrying five heads on their shoulders.
 His children picked mangoes near the military cemetery and sold them to soldiers'
wives for a few pennies--real pennies this time--and his wife started making breakfast akara balls for neighbours in a hurry to start life again. With his family earnings he took
his bicycle to the villages around and bought fresh palm-wine which he mixed generously
in his rooms with the water which had recently started running again in the public tap
down the road, and opened up a bar for soldiers and other lucky people with good money.
 At first he went daily, then every other day and finally once a week, to the offices
of the Coal Corporation where he used to be a miner, to find out what was what. The only
thing he did find out in the end was that that little house of his was even a greater
blessing than he had thought. Some of his fellow ex-miners who had nowhere to return at
the end of the day's waiting just slept outside the doors of the offices and cooked what
meal they could scrounge together in Bournvita tins. As the weeks lengthened and still
nobody could say what was what Jonathan discontinued his weekly visits altogether and
faced his palm-wine bar.
 But nothing puzzles God. Came the day of the windfall when after five days of
endless scuffles in queues and counter-queues in the sun outside the Treasury he had
twenty pounds counted into his palms as exgratia award for the rebel money he had
turned in. It was like Christmas for him and for many others like him when the payments
began. They called it (since few could manage its proper official name) _egg-rasher_.
 As soon as the pound notes were placed in his palm Jonathan simply closed it
tight over them and buried fist and money inside his trouser pocket. He had to be extra
careful because he had seen a man a couple of days earlier collapse into near-madness in
an instant before that oceanic crowd because no sooner had he got his twenty pounds than
some heartless ruffian picked it off him. Though it was not right that a man in such an
extremity of agony should be blamed yet many in the queues that day were able to
remark quietly on the victim's carelessness, especially after he pulled out the innards of
his pocket and revealed a hole in it big enough to pass a thief's head. But of course he had
insisted that the money had been in the other pocket, pulling it out too to show its
comparative wholeness. So one had to be careful.
 Jonathan soon transferred the money to his left hand and pocket so as to leave his
right free for shaking hands should the need arise, though by fixing his gaze at such an
elevation as to miss all approaching human faces he made sure that the need did not arise,
until he got home.
 He was normally a heavy sleeper but that night he heard all the neighbourhood
noises die down one after another. Even the night watchman who knocked the hour on
some metal somewhere in the distance had fallen silent after knocking one o'clock. That
must have been the last thought in Jonathan's mind before he was finally carried away
himself. He couldn't have been gone for long, though, when he was violently awakened
again.
 'Who is knocking?' whispered his wife lying beside him on the floor.
 'I don't know,' he whispered back breathlessly.
 The second time the knocking came it was so loud and imperious that the rickety
old door could have fallen down.
 'Who is knocking?' he asked then, his voice parched and trembling.
 'Na tief-man and him people,' came the cool reply. 'Make you hopen de door.'
This was followed by the heaviest knocking of all.
 Maria was the first to raise the alarm, then he followed and all their children. 
_'Police-o! Thieves-o! Neighbours-o! Police-o! We are lost! We are dead!
Neighbours, are you asleep? Wake up! Police-o!'_
 This went on for a long time and then stopped suddenly. Perhaps they had scared
the thief away. There was total silence. But only for a short while.
 'You done finish?' asked the voice outside. 'Make we help you small. Oya,
everybody!'
 _'Police-o! Tief-man-o! Neighbours-o! we done loss-o! Police-o!...'_
 There were at least five other voices besides the leader's.
 Jonathan and his family were now completely paralysed by terror. Maria and the
children sobbed inaudibly like lost souls. Jonathan groaned continuously.
 The silence that followed the thieves' alarm vibrated horribly. Jonathan all but
begged their leader to speak again and be done with it.
 'My frien,' said he at long last, 'we don try our best for call dem but I tink say dem
all done sleep-o... So wetin we go do now? Sometaim you wan call soja? Or you wan
make we call dem for you? Soja better pass police. No be so?'
 'Na so!' replied his men. Jonathan thought he heard even more voices now than
before and groaned heavily. His legs were sagging under him and his throat felt like sandpaper.
 'My frien, why you no de talk again. I de ask you say you wan make we call soja?'
 'No'.
 'Awrighto. Now make we talk business. We no be bad tief. We no like for make
trouble. Trouble done finish. War done finish and all the katakata wey de for inside. No
Civil War again. This time na Civil Peace. No be so?'
 'Na so!' answered the horrible chorus.
 'What do you want from me? I am a poor man. Everything I had went with this
war. Why do you come to me? You know people who have money. We...'
 'Awright! We know say you no get plenty money. But we sef no get even anini.
So derefore make you open dis window and give us one hundred pound and we go
commot. Orderwise we de come for inside now to show you guitar-boy like dis...'
 A volley of automatic fire rang through the sky. Maria and the children began to
weep aloud again.
 'Ah, missisi de cry again. No need for dat. We done talk say we na good tief. We
just take our small money and go nwayorly. No molest. Abi we de molest?'
 'At all!' sang the chorus.
 'My friends,' began Jonathan hoarsely. 'I hear what you say and I thank you. If I
had one hundred pounds...'
 'Lookia my frien, no be play we come play for your house. If we make mistake
and step for inside you no go like am-o. So derefore...'
 'To God who made me; if you come inside and find one hundred pounds, take it
and shoot me and shoot my wife and children. I swear to God. The only money I have in
this life is this twenty-pounds _egg-rasher_ they gave me today...'
 'OK. Time de go. Make you open dis window and bring the twenty pound. We go
manage am like dat.'
 There were now loud murmurs of dissent among the chorus: 'Na lie de man de lie;
e get plenty money... Make we go inside and search properly well... Wetin be twenty
pound?...' 
'Shurrup!' rang the leader's voice like a lone shot in the sky and silenced the
murmuring at once. 'Are you dere? Bring the money quick!'
 'I am coming,' said Jonathan fumbling in the darkness with the key of the small
wooden box he kept by his side on the mat.
At the first sign of light as neighbours and others assembled to commiserate with him he
was already strapping his five-gallon demijohn to his bicycle carrier and his wife,
sweating in the open fire, was turning over akara balls in a wide clay bowl of boiling oil.
In the corner his eldest son was rinsing out dregs of yesterday's palm wine from old beer
bottles.
 'I count it as nothing,' he told his sympathizers, his eyes on the rope he was tying.
'What is _egg-rasher_? Did I depend on it last week? Or is it greater than other things that
went with the war? I say, let _egg-rasher_ perish in the flames! Let it go where
everything else has gone. Nothing puzzles God.' 