THE CHILD stood glum and limp in the middle of the dark living
room while his father pulled him into a plaid coat. His right arm was
hung in the sleeve but the father buttoned the coat anyway and pushed
him forward toward a pale spotted hand that stuck through the half-open
door.
 "He ain't fixed right," a loud voice said from the hall. 
 "Well then for Christ's sake fix him," the father muttered. "It's six
o'clock in the morning." He was in his bathrobe and barefooted. When he
got the child to the door and tried to shut it, he found her looming in it, a
speckled skeleton in a long pea-green coat and felt helmet.
 "And his and my carfare," she said. "It'll be twict we have to ride the
car."
 He went in the bedroom again to get the money and when he came
back, she and the boy were both standing in the middle of the room. She
was taking stock. "I couldn't smell those dead cigarette butts long if I was
ever to come sit with you," she said, shaking him down in his coat.
 "Here's the change," the father said. He went to the door and opened it
wide and waited.
 After she had counted the money she slipped it somewhere inside her
coat and walked over to a watercolor hanging near the phonograph. "I
know what time it is," she said, peering closely at the black lines crossing
into broken planes of violent color. "I ought to. My shift goes on at 10
P.M. and don't get off till 5 and it takes me one hour to ride the Vine
Street car."
 "Oh, I see," he said; "well, we'll expect him back tonight, about eight
or nine?" 
 "Maybe later," she said. "We're going to the river to a healing. This
particular preacher don't get around this way often. I wouldn't have paid
for that," she said, nodding at the painting, "I would have drew it myself."
 "All right, Mrs. Connin, we'll see you then," he said, drumming on the
door.
 A toneless voice called from the bedroom, "Bring me an icepack."
 "Too bad his mamma's sick," Mrs. Connin said. "What's her trouble?"
 "We don't know," he muttered.
 "We'll ask the preacher to pray for her. He's healed a lot of folks. The
Reverend Bevel Summers. Maybe she ought to see him sometime."
 "Maybe so," he said. "We'll see you tonight," and he disappeared into
the bedroom and left them to go.
 The little boy stared at her silently, his nose and eyes running. He was
four or five. He had a long face and bulging chin and half-shut eyes set
far apart. He seemed mute and patient, like an old sheep waiting to be let
out.
 "You'll like this preacher," she said. "The Reverend Bevel Summers.
You ought to hear him sing."
 The bedroom door opened suddenly and the father stuck his head out
and said, "Good-by, old man. Have a good time." 
 "Good-by," the little boy said and jumped as if he had been shot.
 Mrs. Connin gave the watercolor another look. Then they went out
into the hall and rang for the elevator. "I wouldn't have drew it," she said.
 Outside the gray morning was blocked off on either side by the unlit
empty buildings. "It's going to fair up later," she said, "but this is the last
time we'll be able to have any preaching at the river this year. Wipe your
nose, Sugar Boy."
 He began rubbing his sleeve across it but she stopped him. "That ain't
nice," she said. "Where's your handkerchief?"
 He put his hands in his pockets and pretended to look for it while she
waited. "Some people don't care how they send one off," she murmured
to her reflection in the coffee shop window. "You pervide." She took a red
and blue flowered handkerchief out of her pocket and stooped down and
began to work on his nose. "Now blow," she said and he blew. "You can
borry it. Put it in your pocket."
 He folded it up and put it in his pocket carefully and they walked on
to the corner and leaned against the side of a closed drugstore to wait for
the car. Mrs. Connin turned up her coat collar so that it met her hat in the
back. Her eyelids began to droop and she looked as if she might go to
sleep against the wall. The little boy put a slight pressure on her hand. 
 "What's your name?" she asked in a drowsy voice. "I don't know but
only your last name. I should have found out your first name."
 His name was Harry Ashfield and he had never thought at any time
before of changing it. "Bevel," he said.
 Mrs. Connin raised herself from the wall. "Why ain't that a
coincident!" she said. "I told you that's the name of this preacher!"
 "Bevel," he repeated.
 She stood looking down at him as if he had become a marvel to her.
"I'll have to see you meet him today," she said. "He's no ordinary preacher.
He's a healer. He couldn't do nothing for Mr. Connin though. Mr. Connin
didn't have the faith but he said he would try anything once. He had this
griping in his gut."
 The trolley appeared as a yellow spot at the end of the deserted street.
 "He's gone to the government hospital now," she said, "and they taken
one-third of his stomach. I tell him he better thank Jesus for what he's got
left but he says he ain't thanking nobody. Well I declare," she murmured,
"Bevel!"
 They walked out to the tracks to wait. "Will he heal me?" Bevel
asked.
 "What you got?" 
 "I'm hungry," he decided finally.
 "Didn't you have your breakfast?"
 "I didn't have time to be hungry yet then," he said.
 "Well when we get home we'll both have us something," she said.
"I'm ready myself."
 They got on the car and sat down a few seats behind the driver and
Mrs. Connin took Bevel on her knees. "Now you be a good boy," she said,
"and let me get some sleep. Just don't get off my lap." She lay her head
back and as he watched, gradually her eyes closed and her mouth fell
open to show a few long scattered teeth, some gold and some darker than
her face; she began to whistle and blow like a musical skeleton. There
was no one in the car but themselves and the driver and when he saw she
was asleep, he took out the flowered handkerchief and unfolded it and
examined it carefully. Then he folded it up again and unzipped a place in
the innerlining of his coat and hid it in there and shortly he went to sleep
himself.
 Her house was a half-mile from the end of the car line, set back a little
from the road. It was tan paper brick with a porch across the front of it
and a tin top. On the porch there were three little boys of different sizes
with identical speckled faces and one tall girl who had her hair up in so 
many aluminum curlers that it glared like the roof. The three boys
followed them inside and closed in on Bevel. They looked at him silently,
not smiling.
 "That's Bevel," Mrs. Connin said, taking off her coat. "It's a
coincident he's named the same as the preacher. These boys are J. C.,
Spivey, and Sinclair, and that's Sarah Mildred on the porch. Take off that
coat and hang it on the bed post, Bevel."
 The three boys watched him while he unbuttoned the coat and took it
off. Then they watched him hang it on the bed post and then they stood,
watching the coat. They turned abruptly and went out the door and had a
conference on the porch.
 Bevel stood looking around him at the room. It was part kitchen and
part bedroom. The entire house was two rooms and two porches. Close to
his foot the tail of a light-colored dog moved up and down between two
floor boards as he scratched his back on the underside of the house. Bevel
jumped on it but the hound was experienced and had already withdrawn
when his feet hit the spot.
 The walls were filled with pictures and calendars. There were two
round photographs of an old man and woman with collapsed mouths and
another picture of a man whose eyebrows dashed out of two bushes of 
hair and clashed in a heap on the bridge of his nose; the rest of his face
stuck out like a bare cliff to fall from. "That's Mr. Connin," Mrs. Connin
said, standing back from the stove for a second to admire the face with
him, "but it don't favor him any more." Bevel turned from Mr. Connin to
a colored picture over the bed of a man wearing a white sheet. He had
long hair and a gold circle around his head and he was sawing on a board
while some children stood watching him. He was going to ask who that
was when the three boys came in again and motioned for him to follow
them. He thought of crawling under the bed and hanging onto one of the
legs but the three boys only stood there, speckled and silent, waiting, and
after a second he followed them at a little distance out on the porch and
around the corner of the house. They started off through a field of rough
yellow weeds to the hog pen, a five-foot boarded square full of shoats,
which they intended to ease him over into. When they reached it, they
turned and waited silently, leaning against the side.
 He was coming very slowly, deliberately bumping his feet together as
if he had trouble walking. Once he had been beaten up in the park by
some strange boys when his sitter forgot him, but he hadn't known
anything was going to happen that time until it was over. He began to
smell a strong odor of garbage and to hear the noises of a wild animal. He 
stopped a few feet from the pen and waited, pale but dogged.
 The three boys didn't move. Something seemed to have happened to
them. They stared over his head as if they saw something coming behind
him but he was afraid to turn his own head and look. Their speckles were
pale and their eyes were still and gray as glass. Only their ears twitched
slightly. Nothing happened. Finally, the one in the middle said, "She'd kill
us," and turned, dejected and hacked, and climbed up on the pen and
hung over, staring in.
 Bevel sat down on the ground, dazed with relief, and grinned up at
them.
 The one sitting on the pen glanced at him severely. "Hey you," he said
after a second, "if you can't climb up and see these pigs you can lift that
bottom board off and look in thataway." He appeared to offer this as a
kindness.
 Bevel had never seen a real pig but he had seen a pig in a book and
knew they were small fat pink animals with curly tails and round grinning
faces and bow ties. He leaned forward and pulled eagerly at the board.
 "Pull harder," the littlest boy said. "It's nice and rotten. Just life out
thet nail."
 He eased a long reddish nail out of the soft wood. 
 "Now you can lift up the board and put your face to the . . ." a quiet
voice began.
 He had already done it and another face, gray, wet and sour, was
pushing into his, knocking him down and back as it scraped out under the
plank. Something snorted over him and charged back again, rolling him
over and pushing him up from behind and then sending him forward,
screaming through the yellow field, while it bounded behind.
 The three Connins watched from where they were. The one sitting on
the pen held the loose board back with his dangling foot. Their stern faces
didn't brighten any but they seemed to become less taut, as if some great
need had been partly satisfied. "Maw ain't going to like him lettin out thet
hawg," the smallest one said.
 Mrs. Connin was on the back porch and caught Bevel up as he
reached the steps. The hog ran under the house and subsided, panting, but
the child screamed for five minutes. When she had finally calmed him
down, she gave him his breakfast and let him sit on her lap while he ate it.
The shoat climbed the two steps onto the back porch and stood outside
the screen door, looking in with his head lowered sullenly. He was
long-legged and humpbacked and part of one of his ears had been bitten
off. 
 "Git away!" Mrs. Connin shouted. "That one yonder favors Mr.
Paradise that has the gas station," she said. "You'll see him today at the
healing. He's got the cancer over his ear. He always comes to show he
ain't been healed."
 The shoat stood squinting a few seconds longer and then moved off
slowly. "I don't want to see him," Bevel said.
 They walked to the river, Mrs. Connin in front with him and the three
boys strung out behind and Sarah Mildred, the tall girl, at the end to
holler if one of them ran out on the road. They looked like the skeleton of
an old boat with two pointed ends, sailing slowly on the edge of the
highway. The white Sunday sun followed at a little distance, climbing fast
through a scum of gray cloud as if it meant to overtake them. Bevel
walked on the outside edge, holding Mrs. Connin's hand and looking
down into the orange and purple gulley that dropped off from the
concrete.
 It occurred to him that he was lucky this time that they had found Mrs.
Connin who would take you away for the day instead of an ordinary sitter
who only sat where you lived or went to the park. You found out more 
when you left where you lived. He had found out already this morning
that he had been made by a carpenter named Jesus Christ. Before he had
thought it had been a doctor named Sladewall, a fat man with a yellow
mustache who gave him shots and thought his name was Herbert, but this
must have been a joke. They joked a lot where he lived. If he had thought
about it before, he would have thought Jesus Christ was a word like "oh"
or "damm" or "God," or maybe somebody who had cheated them out of
something sometime. When he had asked Mrs. Connin who the man in
the sheet in the picture over her bed was, she had looked at him a while
with her mouth open. Then she had said, "That's Jesus," and she had kept
on looking at him.
 In a few minutes she had got up and got a book out of the other room.
"See here," she said, turning over the cover, "this belonged to my great
grandmamma. I wouldn't part with it for nothing on earth." She ran her
finger under some brown writing on a spotted page. "Emma Stevens
Oakley, 1832," she said. "Ain't that something to have? And every word
of it the gospel truth." She turned the next page and read him the name:
"The Life of Jesus Christ for Readers Under Twelve." Then she read him
the book.
 It was a small book, pale brown on the outside with gold edges and a 
smell like old putty. It was full of pictures, one of the carpenter driving a
crowd of pigs out of a man. They were real pigs, gray and sour-looking,
and Mrs. Connin said Jesus had driven them all out of this one man.
When she finished reading, she let him sit on the floor and look at the
pictures again.
 Just before they left for the healing, he had managed to get the book
inside his innerlining without her seeing him. Now it made his coat hang
down a little farther on one side than the other. His mind was dreamy and
serene as they walked along and when they turned off the highway onto a
long red clay road winding between banks of honeysuckle, he began to
make wild leaps and pull forward on her hand as if he wanted to dash off
and snatch the sun which was rolling away ahead of them now.
 They walked on the dirt road for a while and then they crossed a field
stippled with purple weeds and entered the shadows of a wood where the
ground was covered with thick pine needles. He had never been in woods
before and he walked carefully, looking from side to side as if he were
entering a strange country. They moved along a bridle path that twisted
downhill through crackling red leaves, and once, catching at a branch to
keep himself from slipping, he looked into two frozen green-gold eyes
enclosed in the darkness of a tree hole. At the bottom of the hill, the 
woods opened suddenly onto a pasture dotted here and there with black
and white cows and sloping down, tier after tier, to a broad orange stream
where the reflection of the sun was set like a diamond.
 There were people standing on the near bank in a group, singing.
Long tables were set up behind them and a few cars and trucks were
parked in a road that came up by the river. They crossed the pasture,
hurrying, because Mrs. Connin, using her hand for a shed over her eyes,
saw the preacher already standing out in the water. She dropped her
basket on one of the tables and pushed the three boys in front of her into
the knot of people so that they wouldn't linger by the food. She kept
Bevel by the hand and eased her way up to the front.
 The preacher was standing about ten feet out in the stream where the
water came up to his knees. He was a tall youth in khaki trousers that he
had rolled up higher than the water. He had on a blue shirt and a red scarf
around his neck but no hat and his light-colored hair was cut in sideburns
that curved into the hollows of his cheeks. His face was all bone and red
light reflected from the river. He looked as if he might have been nineteen
years old. He was singing in a high twangy voice, above the singing on
the bank, and he kept his hands behind him and his head tilted back.
 He ended the hymn on a high note and stood silent, looking down at 
the water and shifting his feet in it. Then he looked up at the people on
the bank. They stood close together, waiting; their faces were solemn but
expectant and every eye was on him. He shifted his feet again.
 "Maybe I know why you come," he said in the twangy voice, "maybe
I don't.
 "If you ain't come for Jesus, you ain't come for me. If you just come
to see can you leave your pain in the river, you ain't come for Jesus. You
can't leave your pain in the river," he said. "I never told nobody that." He
stopped and looked down at his knees.
 "I seen you cure a woman oncet!" a sudden high voice shouted from
the hump of people. "Seen that woman git up and walk out straight where
she had limped in!"
 The preacher lifted one foot and then the other. He seemed almost but
not quite to smile. "You might as well go home if that's what you come
for," he said.
 Then he lifted his head and arms and shouted, "Listen to what I got to
say, you people! There ain't but one river and that's the River of Life,
made out of Jesus' Blood. That's the river you have to lay your pain in, in
the River of Faith, in the River of Life, in the River of Love, in the rich
red river of Jesus' Blood, you people!" 
 His voice grew soft and musical. "All the rivers come from that one
River and go back to it like it was the ocean sea and if you believe, you
can lay your pain in that River and get rid of it because that's the River
that was made to carry sin. It's a River full of pain itself, pain itself,
moving toward the Kingdom of Christ, to be washed away, slow, you
people, slow as this here old red water river round my feet.
 "Listen," he sang, "I read in Mark about an unclean man, I read in
Luke about a blind man, I read in John about a dead man! Oh you people
hear! The same blood that makes this River red, made that leper clean,
made that blind man stare, made that dead man leap! You people with
trouble," he cried, "lay it in that River of Blood, lay it in that River of
Pain, and watch it move away toward the Kingdom of Christ."
 While he preached, Bevel's eyes followed drowsily the slow circles of
two silent birds revolving high in the air. Across the river there was a low
red and gold grove of sassafras with hills of dark blue trees behind it and
an occasional pine jutting over the skyline. Behind, in the distance, the
city rose like a cluster of warts on the side of the mountain. The birds
revolved downward and dropped lightly in the top of the highest pine and
sat hunch-shouldered as if they were supporting the sky.
 "If it's this River of Life you want to lay your pain in, then come up," 
the preacher said, "and lay your sorrow here. But don't be thinking this is
the last of it because this old red river don't end here. This old red
suffering stream goes on, you people, slow to the Kingdom of Christ.
This old red river is good to Baptize in, good to lay your faith in, good to
lay your pain in, but it ain't this muddy water here that saves you. I been
all up and down this river this week," he said. "Tuesday I was in Fortune
Lake, next day in Ideal, Friday me and my wife drove to Lulawillow to
see a sick man there. Them people didn't see no healing," he said and his
face burned redder for a second. "I never said they would."
 While he was talking a fluttering figure had begun to move forward
with a kind of butterfly movement -- an old woman with flapping arms
whose head wobbled as if it might fall off any second. She managed to
lower herself at the edge of the bank and let her arms churn in the water.
Then she bent farther and pushed her face down in it and raised herself up
finally, streaming wet; and still flapping, she turned a time or two in a
blind circle until someone reached out and pulled her back into the group.
 "She's been that way for thirteen years," a rough voice shouted. "Pass
the hat and give this kid his money. That's what he's here for." The shout,
directed out to the boy in the river, came from a huge old man who sat
like a humped stone on the bumper of a long ancient gray automobile. He 
had on a gray hat that was turned down over one ear and up over the other
to expose a purple bulge on his left temple. He sat bent forward with his
hands hanging between his knees and his small eyes half closed.
 Bevel stared at him once and then moved into the folds of Mrs.
Connin's coat and hid himself.
 The boy in the river glanced at the old man quickly and raised his fist.
"Believe Jesus or the devil!" he cried. "Testify to one or the other!"
 "I know from my own self-experience," a woman's mysterious voice
called from the knot of people, "I know from it that this preacher can heal.
My eyes have been opened! I testify to Jesus!"
 The preacher lifted his arms quickly and began to repeat all that he
had said before about the River and the Kingdom of Christ and the old
man sat on the bumper, fixing him with a narrow squint. From time to
time Bevel stared at him again from around Mrs. Connin.
 A man in overalls and a brown coat leaned forward and dipped his
hand in the water quickly and shook it and leaned back, and a woman
held a baby over the edge of the bank and splashed its feet with water.
One man moved a little distance away and sat down on the bank and took
off his shoes and waded out into the stream; he stood there for a few
minutes with his face tilted as far back as it would go, then he waded 
back and put on his shoes. All this time, the preacher sang and did not
appear to watch what went on.
 As soon as he stopped singing, Mrs. Connin lifted Bevel up and said,
"Listen here, preacher, I got a boy from town today that I'm keeping. His
mamma's sick and he wants you to pray for her. And this is a coincident --
his name is Bevel! Bevel," she said, turning to look at the people behind
her, "same as his. Ain't that a coincident, though?"
 There were some murmurs and Bevel turned and grinned over her
shoulder at the faces looking at him. "Bevel," he said in a loud jaunty
voice.
 "Listen," Mrs. Connin said, "have you ever been Baptized, Bevel?"
 He only grinned.
 "I suspect he ain't ever been Baptized," Mrs. Connin said, raising her
eyebrows at the preacher.
 "Swang him over here," the preacher said and took a stride forward
and caught him.
 He held him in the crook of his arm and looked at the grinning face.
Bevel rolled his eyes in a comical way and thrust his face forward, close
to the preacher's. "My name is Bevvvuuuuul," he said in a loud deep
voice and let the tip of his tongue slide across his mouth. 
 The preacher didn't smile. His bony face was rigid and his narrow
gray eyes reflected the almost colorless sky. There was a loud laugh from
the old man sitting on the car bumper and Bevel grasped the back of the
preacher's collar and held it tightly. The grin had already disappeared
from his face. He had the sudden feeling that this was not a joke. Where
he lived everything was a joke. From the preacher's face, he knew
immediately that nothing the preacher said or did was a joke. "My mother
named me that," he said quickly.
 "Have you ever been Baptized?" the preacher asked.
 "What's that?" he murmured.
 "If I Baptize you," the preacher said, "you'll be able to go to the
Kingdom of Christ. You'll be washed in the river of suffering, son, and
you'll go by the deep river of life. Do you want that?"
 "Yes," the child said, and thought, I won't go back to the apartment
then, I'll go under the river.
 "You won't be the same again," the preacher said. "You'll count."
Then he turned his face to the people and began to preach and Bevel
looked over his shoulder at the pieces of the white sun scattered in the
river. Suddenly the preacher said, "All right, I'm going to Baptize you
now," and without more warning, he tightened his hold and swung him 
upside down and plunged his head into the water. He held him under
while he said the words of Baptism and then he jerked him up again and
looked sternly at the gasping child. Bevel's eyes were dark and dilated.
"You count now," the preacher said. "You didn't even count before."
 The little boy was too shocked to cry. He spit out the muddy water
and rubbed his wet sleeve into his eyes and over his face.
 "Don't forget his mamma," Mrs. Connin called. "He wants you to pray
for his mamma. She's sick."
 "Lord," the preacher said, "we pray for somebody in affliction who
isn't here to testify. Is your mother sick in the hospital?" he asked. "Is she
in pain?"
 The child stared at him. "She hasn't got up yet," he said in a high
dazed voice. "She has a hangover." The air was so quiet he could hear the
broken pieces of the sun knocking in the water.
 The preacher looked angry and startled. The red drained out of his
face and the sky appeared to darken in his eyes. There was a loud guffaw
from the bank and Mr. Paradise shouted, "Haw! Cure the afflicted woman
with the hangover!" and began to beat his knee with his fist. 
 "He's had a long day," Mrs. Connin said, standing with him in the
door of the apartment and looking sharply into the room where the party
was going on. "I reckon it's past his regular bedtime." One of Bevel's eyes
was closed and the other half closed; his nose was running and he kept his
mouth open and breathed through it. The damp plaid coat dragged down
on one side.
 That would be her, Mrs. Connin decided, in the black britches -- long
black satin britches and barefoot sandals and red toenails. She was lying
on half the sofa, with her knees crossed in the air and her head propped
on the arm. She didn't get up.
 "Hello Harry," she said. "Did you have a big day?" She had a long
pale face, smooth and blank, and straight sweet-potato-colored hair,
pulled back.
 The father went off to get the money. There were two other couples.
One of the men, blond with little violet-blue eyes, leaned out of his chair
and said, "Well Harry, old man, have a big day?"
 "His name ain't Harry. It's Bevel," Mrs. Connin said.
 "His name is Harry," _she_ said from the sofa. "Whoever heard of
anybody named Bevel?"
 The little boy had seemed to be going to sleep on his feet, his head 
drooping farther and farther forward; he pulled it back suddenly and
opened one eye; the other was stuck.
 "He told me this morning his name was Bevel," Mrs. Connin said in a
shocked voice. "The same as our preacher. We been all day at a preaching
and healing at the river. He said his name was Bevel, the same as the
preacher's. That's what he told me."
 "Bevel!" his mother said. "My God! what a name."
 "This preacher is name Bevel and there's no better preacher around,"
Mrs. Connin said. "And furthermore," she added in a defiant tone, "he
Baptized this child this morning!"
 His mother sat straight up. "Well the nerve!" she muttered.
 "Furthermore," Mrs. Connin said, "he's a healer and he prayed for you
to be healed."
 "Healed!" she almost shouted. "Healed of what for Christ's sake?"
 "Of your affliction," Mrs. Connin said icily.
 The father had returned with the money and was standing near Mrs.
Connin waiting to give it to her. His eyes were lined with red threads.
"Go on, go on," he said, "I want to hear more about her affliction. The
exact nature of it has escaped . . ." He waved the bill and his voice trailed
off. "Healing by prayer is mighty inexpensive," he murmured. 
 Mrs. Connin stood a second, staring into the room, with a skeleton's
appearance of seeing everything. Then, without taking the money, she
turned and shut the door behind her. The father swung around, smiling
vaguely, and shrugged. The rest of them were looking at Harry. The little
boy began to shamble toward the bedroom.
 "Come here, Harry," his mother said. He automatically shifted his
direction toward her without opening his eye any farther. "Tell me what
happened today," she said when he reached her. She began to pull off his
coat.
 "I don't know," he mattered.
 "Yes you do know," she said, feeling the coat heavier on one side. She
unzipped the innerlining and caught the book and a dirty handkerchief as
they fell out. "Where did you get these?"
 "I don't know," he said and grabbed for them. "They're mine. She
gave them to me."
 She threw the handkerchief down and held the book too high for him
to reach and began to read it, her face after a second assuming an
exaggerated comical expression. The others moved around and looked at
it over her shoulder. "My God," somebody said.
 One of the men peered at it sharply from behind a thick pair of glasses. 
"That's valuable," he said. "That's a collector's item," and he took it away
from the rest of them and retired to another chair.
 "Don't let George go off with that," his girl said.
 "I tell you it's valuable," George said. "1832."
 Bevel shifted his direction again toward the room where he slept. He
shut the door behind him and moved slowly in the darkness to the bed
and sat down and took off his shoes and got under the cover. After a
minute a shaft of light let in the tall silhouette of his mother. She tiptoed
lightly across the room and sat down on the edge of his bed. "What did
that dolt of a preacher say about me?" she whispered. "What lies have
you been telling today, honey?"
 He shut his eye and heard her voice from a long way away, as if he
were under the river and she on top of it. She shook his shoulder. "Harry,"
she said, leaning down and putting her mouth to his ear, "tell me what he
said." She pulled him into a sitting position and he felt as if he had been
drawn up from under the river. "Tell me," she whispered and her bitter
breath covered his face.
 He saw the pale oval close to him in the dark. "He said I'm not the
same now," he muttered. "I count."
 After a second, she lowered him by his shirt front onto the pillow. She 
hung over him an instant and brushed her lips against his forehead. Then
she got up and moved away, swaying her hips lightly through the shaft of
light.
 He didn't wake up early but the apartment was still dark and close
when he did. For a while he lay there, picking his nose and eyes. Then he
sat up in bed and looked out the window. The sun came in palely, stained
gray by the glass. Across the street at the Empire Hotel, a colored
cleaning woman was looking down from an upper window, resting her
face on her folded arms. He got up and put on his shoes and went to the
bathroom and then into the front room. He ate two crackers spread with
anchovy paste, that he found on the coffee table, and drank some ginger
ale left in a bottle and looked around for his book but it was not there.
 The apartment was silent except for the faint humming of the
refrigerator. He went into the kitchen and found some raisin bread heels
and spread a half jar of peanut butter between them and climbed up on the
tall kitchen stool and sat chewing the sandwich slowly, wiping his nose
every now and then on his shoulder. When he finished he found some
chocolate milk and drank that. He would rather have had the ginger ale he 
saw but they left the bottle openers where he couldn't reach them. He
studied what was left in the refrigerator for a while -- some shriveled
vegetables that she had forgot were there and a lot of brown oranges that
she bought and didn't squeeze; there were three or four kinds of cheese
and something fishy in a paper bag; the rest was a pork bone. He left the
refrigerator door open and wandered back into the dark living room and
sat down on the sofa.
 He decided they would be out cold until one o'clock and that they
would all have to go to a restaurant for lunch. He wasn't high enough for
the table yet and the waiter would bring a highchair and he was too big
for a highchair. He sat in the middle of the sofa, kicking it with his heels.
Then he got up and wandered around the room, looking into the ashtrays
at the butts as if this might be a habit. In his own room he had picture
books and blocks but they were for the most part torn up; he found the
way to get new ones was to tear up the ones he had. There was very little
to do at any time but eat; however, he was not a fat boy.
 He decided he would empty a few of the ashtrays on the floor. If he
only emptied a few, she would think they had fallen. He emptied two,
rubbing the ashes carefully into the rug with his finger. Then he lay on the
floor for a while, studying his feet which he held up in the air. His shoes 
were still damp and he began to think about the river.
 Very slowly, his expression changed as if he were gradually seeing
appear what he didn't know he'd been looking for. Then all of a sudden he
knew what he wanted to do.
 He got up and tiptoed into their bedroom and stood in the dim light
there, looking for her pocketbook. His glance passed her long pale arm
hanging off the edge of the bed down to the floor, and across the white
mound his father made, and past the crowded bureau, until it rested on the
pocketbook hung on the back of a chair. He took a car-token out of it and
half a package of Life Savers. Then he left the apartment and caught the
car at the corner. He hadn't taken a suitcase because there was nothing
from there he wanted to keep.
 He got off the car at the end of the line and started down the road he
and Mrs. Connin had taken the day before. He knew there wouldn't be
anybody at her house because the three boys and the girl went to school
and Mrs. Connin had told him she went out to clean. He passed her yard
and walked on the way they had gone to the river. The paper brick houses
were far apart and after a while the dirt place to walk on ended and he had
to walk on the edge of the highway. The sun was pale yellow and high
and hot. 
 He passed a shack with an orange gas pump in front of it but he didn't
see the old man looking out at nothing in particular from the doorway. Mr.
Paradise was having an orange drink. He finished it slowly, squinting
over the bottle at the small plaid-coated figure disappearing down the
road. Then he set the empty bottle on a bench and, still squinting, wiped
his sleeve over his mouth. He went in the shack and picked out a
peppermint stick, a foot long and two inches thick, from the candy shelf,
and stuck it in his hip pocket. Then he got in his car and drove slowly
down the highway after the boy.
 By the time Bevel came to the field speckled with purple weeds, he
was dusty and sweating and he crossed it at a trot to get into the woods as
fast as he could. Once inside, he wandered from tree to tree, trying to find
the path they had taken yesterday. Finally he found a line worn in the pine
needles and followed it until he saw the steep trail twisting down through
the trees.
 Mr. Paradise had left his automobile back some way on the road and
had walked to the place where he was accustomed to sit almost every day,
holding an unbaited fish-line in the water while he stared at the river
passing in front of him. Anyone looking at him from a distance would
have seen an old boulder half hidden in the bushes. 
 Bevel didn't see him at all. He only saw the river, shimmering reddish
yellow, and bounded into it with his shoes and his coat on and took a gulp.
He swallowed some and spit the rest out and then he stood there in water
up to his chest and looked around him. The sky was a clear pale blue, all
in one piece -- except for the hole the sun made -- and fringed around the
bottom with treetops. His coat floated to the surface and surrounded him
like a strange gay lily pad and he stood grinning in the sun. He intended
not to fool with preachers any more but to Baptize himself and to keep on
going this time until he found the Kingdom of Christ in the river. He
didn't mean to waste any more time. He put his head under the water at
once and pushed forward.
 In a second he began to gasp and sputter and his head reappeared on
the surface; he started under again and the same thing happened. The
river wouldn't have him. He tried again and came up, choking. This was
the way it had been when the preacher held him under -- he had had to
fight with something that pushed him back in the face. He stopped and
thought suddenly: it's another joke, it's just another joke! He thought how
far he had come for nothing and he began to hit and splash and kick the
filthy river. His feet were already treading on nothing. He gave one low
cry of pain and indignation. Then he heard a shout and turned his head 
and saw something like a giant pig bounding after him, shaking a red and
white club and shouting. He plunged under once and this time, the
waiting current caught him like a long gentle hand and pulled him swiftly
forward and down. For an instant he was overcome with surprise; then
since he was moving quickly and knew that he was getting somewhere,
all his fury and his fear left him.
 Mr. Paradise's head appeared from time to time on the surface of the
water. Finally, far downstream, the old man rose like some ancient water
monster and stood empty-handed, staring with his dull eyes as far down
the river line as he could see. 