The ship came down from space. It came from the stars and the black velocities, and the
shining movements, and the silent gulfs of space. It was a new ship; it had fire in its body and
men in its metal cells, and it moved with a clean silence, fiery and warm. In it were seventeen
men, including a captain. The crowd at the Ohio field had shouted and waved their hands up into
the sunlight, and the rocket had bloomed out great flowers of heat and color and run away into
space on the third voyage to Mars!
Now it was decelerating with metal efficiency in the upper Martian atmospheres. It was still a
thing of beauty and strength. It had moved in the midnight waters of space like a pale sea
leviathan; it had passed the ancient moon and thrown itself onward into one nothingness
following another. The men within it had been battered, thrown about, sickened, made well
again, each in his turn. One man had died, but now the remaining sixteen, with their eyes clear in
their heads and their faces pressed to the thick glass ports, watched Mars swing up under them.
"Mars! Mars! Good old Mars, here we are!" cried Navigator Lustig.
"Good old Mars!" said Samuel Hinkston, archaeologist.
"Well," said Captain John Black.
The ship landed softly on a lawn of green grass. Outside, upon the lawn, stood an iron deer.
Further up the lawn, a tall brown Victorian house sat in the quiet sunlight, all covered with
scrolls and rococo, its windows made of blue and pink and yellow and green colored glass'
Upon the porch were hairy geraniums and an old swing which was hooked into the porch
ceiling and which now swung back and forth, back and forth, in a little breeze. At the top of the
house was a cupola with diamond, leaded-glass windows, and a dunce-cap roof! Through the
front window you could see an ancient piano with yellow keys and a piece of music titled
Beautiful Ohio sitting on the music rest.
Around the rocket in four directions spread the little town, green and motionless in the
Martian spring. There were white houses and red brick ones, and tall elm trees blowing in the
wind, and tall maples and horse chestnuts. And church steeples with golden bells silent in them.
The men in the rocket looked out and saw this. Then they looked at one another and then
they looked out again. They held on to each other's elbows, suddenly unable to breathe, it
seemed. Their faces grew pale and they blinked constantly, running from glass port to glass port
of the ship.
"I'll be damned," whispered Lustig, rubbing his face with his numb fingers, his
eyes wet. "I'll be damned, damned, damned." "It can't be, it just can't be," said Samuel Hinkston.
"Lord," said Captain John Black. There was a call from the chemist. "Sir, the atmosphere is
fine for breathing, sir." Black turned slowly. "Are you sure?" "No doubt of it, sir." "Then
we'll go out," said Lustig. "Lord, yes," said Samuel Hinkston. "Hold on," said Captain John
Black. "Just a moment. Nobody gave any orders." "But, sir—" "Sir, nothing. How do we
know what this is?" "We know what it is, sir," said the chemist. "It's a small town with good
air in it,
sir." "And it's a small town the like of Earth
towns," said Samuel Hinkston, the 
archaeologist. "Incredible. It can't be, but it is."
Captain John Black looked at him, idly. "Do
you think that the civilizations of two
planets can progress at the same rate and evolve in the same way, Hinkston?" "I wouldn't have
thought so, sir." Captain Black stood by the port. "Look out there. The geraniums. A
specialized
plant. That specific variety has only been known on Earth Or fi% years. Think of the thousands
of years of time it takes to evolve Plants. Then tell me if it is logical that the Martians should
have: one, eaded glass windows; two, cupolas; three, porch swings; four, an instrument that
looks like a piano and probably is a piano; and, five, if you look closely, if a Martian composer
would have published a piece of music titled, strangely enough, Beautiful Ohio. All of which
means that we have an Ohio River here on Mars!"
"It is quite strange, sir."
"Strange, hell, it's absolutely impossible, and I suspect the whole bloody shooting
setup. Something's wrong here, and I'm not leaving the ship until I know what it is." "Oh, sir,"
said Lustig. "Darn it," said Samuel Hinkston. "Sir, I want to investigate this at first hand. It
may be that there are similar patterns of thought, movement, civilization on every planet in
our system. We may be on the threshold of the great psychological and metaphysical
discovery in our time, sir, don't you think?"
"I'm willing to wait a moment," said Captain John Black.
"It may be, sir, that we are looking upon a phenomenon that, for the first time,
would absolutely prove the existence of a God, sir." "There are many people who are of good
faith without such proof, Mr. Hinkston." "I'm one myself, sir. But certainly a thing like this,
out there," said Hinkston,
"could not occur without divine intervention, sir. It fills me with such terror and
elation I don't know whether to laugh or cry, sir." "Do neither, then, until we
know what we're up against."
"Up against, sir?" inquired Lustig. "I see that we're up against nothing. It's a good quiet,
green town, much like the one I was born in, and Hike the looks of it."
"When were you born, Lustig?" "In 1910, sir." "That makes you fifty years old, now,
doesn't it?" "This being 1960, yes, sir." "And you, Hinkston?" "1920, sir. In Illinois. And this
looks swell to me, sir." "This couldn't be Heaven," said the captain, ironically. "Though, I
must admit, it
looks peaceful and cool, and pretty much like Green Bluff, where I was born, in
1915." He looked at the chemist. "The air's all right, is it?" "Yes, sir." "Well, then, tell you what
we'll do. Lustig, you and Hinkston and I will fetch
ourselves out to look this town over. The other 14 men will stay aboard ship. If anything
untoward happens, lift the ship and get the hell out, do you hear what I say, Craner?"
"Yes, sir. The hell out we'll go, sir. Leaving you?"
"A loss of three men's better than a whole ship. If something bad happens get back to Earth
and warn the next Rocket, that's Lingle's Rocket, I think, which will be completed and ready to
take off some time around next Christmas, what he has to meet up with. If there's something
hostile about Mars we certainly want the next expedition to be well armed."
"So are we, sir. We've got a regular arsenal with us." 
"Tell the men to stand by the guns, then, as Lustig and Hinkston and I go out."
"Right, sir."
"Come along, Lustig, Hinkston."
The three men walked together, down through the levels of the ship.
It was a beautiful spring day. A robin sat on a blossoming apple tree and sang continuously.
Showers of petal snow sifted down when the wind touched the apple tree, and the blossom smell
drifted upon the air. Somewhere in the town, somebody was playing the piano and the music
came and went, came and went, softly, drowsily. The song was Beautiful Dreamer. Somewhere
else, a phonograph, scratchy and faded, was hissing out a record of Roamin' In The Gloamin',
sung by Harry Lauder.
The three men stood outside the ship. The port closed behind them. At every window, a face
pressed, looking out. The large metal guns pointed this way and that, ready.
Now the phonograph record being played was:
"Oh give me a June night The moonlight and you—"
Lustig began to tremble. Samuel Hinkston did likewise.
Hinkston's voice was so feeble and uneven that the captain had to ask him to
repeat what he had said. "I said, sir, that I think I have solved this, all of this, sir!" "And what is
the solution, Hinkston?" The soft wind blew. The sky was serene and quiet and somewhere a
stream of
water ran through the cool caverns and tree-shadings of a ravine.
Somewhere a horse and wagon trotted and rolled by, bumping. "Sir, it
must be, it has to be, this is the only solution! Rocket travel began to Mars
in the years before the first World War, sir!" The captain stared at his
archaeologist. "No!" . "But, yes, sir! You must admit,
look at all of this! How else explain n> the houses, the lawns, the iron deer, the flowers,
the pianos, the music!"
'Hinkston, Hinkston, oh," and the captain put his hand to his face, snaking his head, his
hand shaking now, his lips blue.
"Sir, listen to me." Hinkston took his elbow persuasively and looked up into the captain's
face, pleading. "Say that there were some people in the year 1905, perhaps, who hated wars
and wanted to get away from Earth and they got together, some scientists, in secret, and built a
rocket and came out here to Mars."
"No, no, Hinkston."
"Why not? The world was a different place in 1905, they could have kept it a secret
much more easily."
"But the work, Hinkston, the work of building a complex thing like a rocket, oh, no, no."
The captain looked at his shoes, looked at his hands, looked at the houses, and then at
Hinkston.
"And they came up here, and naturally the houses they built were similar to Earth houses
because they brought the cultural architecture with them, and here it is!" 
"And they've lived here all these years?" said the captain.
"In peace and quiet, sir, yes. Maybe they made a few trips, to bring enough people here for
one small town, and then stopped, for fear of being discovered. That's why the town seems so
old-fashioned. I don't see a thing, myself, that is older than the year 1927, do you?"
"No, frankly, I don't, Hinkston."
"These are our people, sir. This is an American city; it's definitely not European!"
"That—that's right, too, Hinkston."
"Or maybe, just maybe, sir, rocket travel is older than we think. Perhaps it started in some
part of the world hundreds of years ago, was discovered and kept secret by a small number of
men, and they came to Mars, with only occasional visits to Earth over the centuries."
"You make it sound almost reasonable."
"It is, sir. It has to be. We have the proof here before us, all we have to do now, is find some
people and verify it!"
"You're right there, of course. We can't just stand here and talk. Did you bring your
gun?"
"Yes, but we won't need it."
"We'll see about it. Come along, we'll ring that doorbell and see if anyone is home."
Their boots were deadened of all sound in the thick green grass. I' smelled from a fresh
mowing. In spite of himself, Captain John Black felt a great peace come over him. It had been
thirty years since he had been in a small town, and the buzzing of spring bees on the air lulled
and quieted him, and the fresh look of things was a balm to the soul.
Hollow echoes sounded from under the boards as they walked across the porch and stood
before the screen door. Inside, they could see a head curtain hung across the hall entry, and a
crystal chandelier and a jvtaxfield Parrish painting framed on one wall over a comfortable Morris
Chair. The house smelled old, and of the attic, and infinitely comfortable. You could hear the
tinkle of ice rattling in a lemonade pitcher. In a distant kitchen, because of the heat of the day,
someone was preparing a Soft, lemon drink.
Captain John Black rang the bell.
Footsteps, dainty and thin, came along the hall and a kind faced lady of some forty years,
dressed in the sort of dress you might expect in the year 1909, peered out
at them. "Can I help you?" she asked. "Beg your pardon," said Captain Black, uncertainly. "But
we're looking for, that
is, could you help us, I mean." He stopped. She looked out
at him with dark wondering eyes. "If you're selling
something," she said, "I'm much too busy and I haven't
time."
She turned to go. "No, wait," he cried, bewilderedly. "What town is this?" She looked him up
and down as if he were crazy. "What do you mean, what town
is it? How could you be in a town and not know what town it was?"
The captain looked as if he wanted to go sit under a shady apple tree. "I beg your pardon,"
he said. "But we're strangers here. We're from Earth, and we want to know how this town got
here and you got here.''
"Are you census takers?" she asked.
"No," he said.
"What do you want then?" she demanded.
"Well," said the captain. 
"Well?" she asked.
"How long has this town been here?" he wondered.
"It was built in 1868," she snapped at them. "Is this a game?"
"No, not a game," cried the captain. "Oh, God," he said. "Look here. We're from
Earth!" "From where?" she said. "From Earth!" he said. "Where's that?" she said. "From Earth,"
he cried. "Out of the ground, do you mean?" "No, from the planet Earth!" he almost shouted.
"Here," he insisted, come out on
the porch and I'll show you." "I won't come out there, you are all evidently quite "No," she said,
mad from the sun." Lustig and Hinkston stood behind the captain. Hinkston now spoke up.
"Mrs.," he
said. "We came in a flying ship across space, among the stars. We came from the third
planet from the sun, Earth, to this planet, which is Mars. Now do you understand, Mrs.?"
"Mad from the sun," she said, taking hold of the door. "Go away now, before I
call my husband who's upstairs taking a nap, and he'll beat you all with his fists." "But—" said
Hinkston. "This is Mars, is it not?" "This," explained the woman, as if she were addressing a
child, "is Green Lake,
Wisconsin, on the continent of America, surrounded by the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, on
a place called the world, or sometimes, the Earth. Go away now. Goodbye!"
She slammed the door.
The three men stood before the door with their hands up in the air toward it, as if
pleading with her to open it once more. They looked at one another. "Let's knock the door
down," said Lustig. "We can't," sighed the captain. "Why not?" "She didn't do anything bad,
did she? We're the strangers here. This is private
property. Good God, Hinkston!" He went and sat down on the porchstep.
"What, sir?"
"Did it ever strike you, that maybe we got ourselves, somehow, some way, fouled up. And,
by accident, came back and landed on Earth!"
"Oh, sir, oh, sir, oh oh, sir." And Hinkston sat down numbly and thought about it.
Lustig stood up in the sunlight. "How could we have done that?"
"I don't know, just let me think."
Hinkston said, "But we checked every mile of the way, and we saw Mars and our
chronometers said so many miles gone, and we went past the moon and out into space and here
we are, on Mars. I'm sure we're on Mars, sir."
Lustig said, "But, suppose, just suppose that, by accident, in space, in time, or
something, we landed on a planet in space, in another time- Suppose this is Earth, thirty or
fifty years ago? Maybe we got lost i" the dimensions, do you think?"
"Oh, go away, Lustig."
"Are the men in the ship keeping an eye on us, Hinkston?"
"At their guns, sir."
Lustig went to the door, rang the bell. When the door opened again, he asked, "What
year is this?"
"1926, of course!" cried the woman, furiously, and slammed the door again.
"Did you hear that?" Lustig ran back to them, wildly. "She said 1926! We have gone back
in time! This is Earth!" 
Lustig sat down and the three men let the wonder and terror of the thought afflict them.
Their hands stirred fitfully on their knees. The wind blew, nodding the locks of hair on their
heads.
The captain stood up, brushing off his pants. "I never thought it would be like this. It scares
the hell out of me. How can a thing like this happen?"
"Will anybody in the whole town believe us?" wondered Hinkston. "Are we playing
around with something dangerous? Time, I mean. Shouldn't we just take off and go home?"
"No. We'll try another house."
They walked three houses down to a little white cottage under an oak tree. "I like to be as
logical as I can get," said the captain. He nodded at the town. "How does this sound to you,
Hinkston? Suppose, as you said originally, that rocket travel occurred years ago. And when the
Earth people had lived here a number of years they began to get homesick for Earth. First a mild
neurosis about it, then a full fledged psychosis. Then, threatened insanity. What would you do,
as a psychiatrist, if faced with such a problem?"
Hinkston thought. "Well, I think I'd re-arrange the civilization on Mars so it resembled
Earth more and more each day. If there was any way of reproducing every plant, every road and
every lake, and even an ocean, I would do so. Then I would, by some vast crowd hypnosis,
theoretically anyway, convince everyone in a town this size that this really was Earth, not Mars
at all."
"Good enough, Hinkston. I think we're on the right track now. That woman in that house
back there, just thinks she's living on Earth. It protects her sanity. She and all the others in this
town are the patients of the greatest experiment in migration and hypnosis you will ever lay your
eyes on in your life."
"That's it, sir!" cried Lustig.
"Well," the captain sighed. "Now we're getting somewhere. I feel tetter. It all sounds a bit
more logical now. This talk about time and going back and forth and traveling in time turns my
stomach upside down. But, this way—" He actually smiled for the first time in a month.
Well. It looks as if we'll be fairly welcome here."
"Or, will we, sir?" said Lustig. "After all, like the Pilgrims, these people came here to
escape Earth. Maybe they won't be too happy to see us, sir. Maybe they'll try to drive us out or
kill us?"
"We have superior weapons if that should happen. Anyway, all we can do is try. This next
house now. Up we go."
But they had hardly crossed the lawn when Lustig stopped and looked off across the town,
down the quiet, dreaming afternoon street. "Sir," he said.
"What is it, Lustig?" asked the captain.
"Oh, sir, sir, what I see, what I do see now before me, oh, oh—-" said Lustig, and he began
to cry. His fingers came up, twisting and trembling, and his face was all wonder and joy and
incredulity. He sounded as if any moment he might go quite insane with happiness. He looked
down the street and he began to run, stumbling, awkwardly, falling, picking himself up, and
running on. "Oh, God, God, thank you, God! Thank you!"
"Don't let him get away!" The captain broke into a run.
Now Lustig was running at full speed, shouting. He turned into a yard half way down the
little shady side street and leaped up upon the porch of a large green house with an iron rooster
on the roof.
He was beating upon the door, shouting and hollering and crying when Hinkston and the 
captain ran up and stood in the yard.
The door opened. Lustig yanked the screen wide and in a high wail of discovery and
happiness, cried out, "Grandma! Grandpa!"
Two old people stood in the doorway, their faces lighting up.
"Albert!" Their voices piped and they rushed out to embrace and pat him on the back and
move around him. "Albert, oh, Albert, it's been so many years! How you've grown, boy, how
big you are, boy, oh, Albert boy, how are you!"
"Grandma, Grandpa!" sobbed Albert Lustig. "Good to see you! You look fine, fine! Oh,
fine!" He held them, turned them, kissed them, hugged them, cried on them, held them out again,
blinked at the little old people. The sun was in the sky, the wind blew, the grass was green, the
screen door stood open.
"Come in, lad, come in, there's lemonade for you, fresh, lots of it!"
"Grandma, Grandpa, good to see you! I've got friends down here! Here!" Lustig turned and
waved wildly at the captain and Hinkston, who, all during the adventure on the porch, had
stood in the shade of a tree, holding onto each other. "Captain, captain, come up, come up, I
want you to meet my grandfolks!"
"Howdy," said the folks. "Any friend of Albert's is ours, too! Don't stand there with your
mouths open! Come on!"
In the living room of the old house it was cool and a grandfather clock ticked high and long
and bronzed in one corner. There were soft pillows on large couches and walls filled with books
and a rug cut in a thick rose pattern and antimacassars pinned to furniture, and lemonade in the
hand, sweating, and cool on the thirsty tongue.
"Here's to our health." Grandma tipped her glass to her porcelain teeth.
"How long you been here, Grandma?" said Lustig.
"A good many years," she said, tartly. "Ever since we died."
"Ever since you what?" asked Captain John Black, putting his drink down.
"Oh, yes," Lustig looked at his captain. "They've been dead thirty years."
"And you sit there, calmly!" cried the captain.
"Tush," said the old woman, and winked glitteringly at John Black. "Who are we to
question what happens? Here we are. What's life, anyways? Who does what for why and
where? All we know is here we are, alive again, and no questions asked. A second chance." She
toddled over and held out her thin wrist to Captain John Black.
"Feel." He felt. "Solid, ain't I?" she asked. He nodded. "You hear my voice don't you?" she
inquired. Yes, he did. "Well, then," she said in triumph, "why go around questioning?"
"Well," said the captain, "it's simply that we never thought we'd find a thing like this on
Mars."
"And now you've found it. I dare say there's lots on every planet that'll show you God's
infinite ways."
"Is this Heaven?" asked Hinkston.
"Nonsense, no. It's a world and we get a second chance. Nobody told us why. But then
nobody told us why we were on Earth, either. That other Earth, I mean. The one you came from.
How do we know there wasn't another before that one?"
"A good question," said the captain.
The captain stood up and slapped his hand on his leg in an offhand fashion. "We've
got to be going. It's been nice. Thank you for the drinks."
He stopped. He turned and looked toward the door, startled. Far away, in the sunlight, there 
was a sound of voices, a crowd, a snouting and a great hello. ''What's that?" asked Hinkston.
'We'll soon find out!" And Captain John Black was out the front °°r abruptly, jolting
across the green lawn and into the street of the Martian town.
He stood looking at the ship. The ports were open and his crew were streaming out, waving
their hands. A crowd of people had gathered and in and through and among these people the
members of the crew were running, talking, laughing, shaking hands. People did little dances.
People swarmed. The rocket lay empty and abandoned.
A brass band exploded in the sunlight, flinging off a gay tune from upraised tubas and
trumpets. There was a bang of drums and a shrill of fifes. Little girls with golden hair jumped up
and down. Little boys shouted, "Hooray!" And fat men passed around ten-cent cigars. The mayor
of the town made a speech. Then, each member of the crew with a mother on one arm, a father or
sister on the other, was spirited off down the street, into little cottages or big mansions and doors
slammed shut.
The wind rose in the clear spring sky and all was silent. The brass band had banged off
around a corner leaving the rocket to shine and dazzle alone in the sunlight.
"Abandoned!" cried the captain. "Abandoned the ship, they did! I'll have their skins, by
God! They had orders!"
"Sir," said Lustig. "Don't be too hard on them. Those were all old relatives and friends."
"That's no excuse!"
"Think how they felt, captain, seeing familiar faces outside the ship!"
"I would have obeyed orders! I would have—" The captain's mouth remained open.
Striding along the sidewalk under the Martian sun, tall, smiling, eyes blue, face tan, came
a young man of some twenty-six years.
"John!" the man cried, and broke into a run.
"What?" said Captain John Black. He swayed.
"John, you old beggar, you!"
The man ran up and gripped his hand and slapped him on the back.
"It's you," said John Black.
"Of course, who'd you think it was!"
"Edward!" The captain appealed now to Lustig and Hinkston, holding the stranger's hand.
"This is my brother Edward. Ed, meet my men, Lustig, Hinkston! My brother!"
They tugged at each other's hands and arms and then finally env braced. "Ed!" "John, you
old bum, you!" "You're looking fine, Ed, but, Ed, what is this? You haven't changed over the
years. You died, remember, when you were twenty-six, and I was nineteen, oh God, s° many
years ago, and here you are, and, Lord, what goes on, what goes on?"
Edward Black gave him a brotherly knock on the chin. "Mom's waiting," he said.
"Mom?"
"And Dad, too."
"And Dad?" The captain almost fell to earth as if hit upon the chest with a
mighty weapon. He walked stiffly and awkwardly, out of coordination. He stuttered and
whispered and talked only one or two words at a time. "Mom alive? Dad? Where?"
"At the old house on Oak Knoll Avenue."
"The old house." The captain stared in delighted amazement. "Did you hear that,
Lustig, Hinkston?" "I know it's hard for you to believe." "But alive. Real." "Don't I feel real?" 
The strong arm, the firm grip, the white smile. The light,
curling hair.
Hinkston was gone. He had seen his own house down the street and was running for it.
Lustig was grinning. "Now you understand, sir, what happened to everybody on the ship. They
couldn't help themselves."
"Yes. Yes," said the captain, eyes shut. "Yes." He put out his hand. "When I open my eyes,
you'll be gone." He opened his eyes. "You're still here. God, Edward, you look fine!"
"Come along, lunch is waiting for you. I told Mom."
Lustig said, "Sir, I'll be with my grandfolks if you want me,"
"What? Oh, fine, Lustig. Later, then."
Edward grabbed his arm and marched him. "You need support."
"I do. My knees, all funny. My stomach, loose. God."
"There's the house. Remember it?"
"Remember it? Hell! I bet I can beat you to the front porch!"
They ran. The wind roared over Captain John Black's ears. The earth roared under
his feet. He saw the golden figure of Edward Black pull ahead of him in the amazing dream of
reality. He saw the house rush forward, the door open, the screen swing back. "Beat you!" cried
Edward, bounding up the steps. "I'm an old man," panted the captain, 'and you're still young.
But, then, you always beat me, I remember!"
In the doorway, Mom, pink and plump and bright. And behind her, Pepper grey,
Dad, with his pipe in his hand. "Mom, Dad!" He ran up the steps like a child, to meet them. It
was a fine long afternoon. They finished lunch and they sat in the living room
and he told them all about his rocket and his being captain as they nodded and smiled upon him
and Mother was just the same, Dad bit the end off a cigar and lighted it in his old fashion. Mom
brought in some iced tea in the middle of the afternoon. Then, there was a big turkey dinner at
night and time flowing on. When the drumsticks were sucked clean and lay brittle upon the
plates, the captain leaned back in his chair and exhaled his deep contentment. Dad poured him a
small glass of dry sherry. It was seven-thirty in the evening. Night was in all the trees and
coloring the sky, and the lamps were halos of dim light in the gentle house. From all the other
houses down the streets came sounds of music, pianos playing, laughter.
Mom put a record on the victrola and she and Captain John Black had a dance. She was
wearing the same perfume he remembered from the summer when she and Dad had been
killed in the train accident. She was very real in his arms as they danced lightly to the music.
"I'll wake in the morning," said the captain. "And I'll be in my rocket in space, and all this
will be gone."
"No, no, don't think that," she cried, softly, pleadingly. "We're here. Don't question.
God is good to us. Let's be happy."
The record ended with a circular hissing.
"You're tired, son," said Dad. He waved his pipe. "You and Ed go on upstairs. Your old
bedroom is waiting for you."
"The old one?"
"The brass bed and all," laughed Edward.
"But I should report my men in."
"Why?" Mother was logical.
"Why? Well, I don't know. No reason, I guess. No, none at all. What's the 
difference?" He shook his head. "I'm not being very logical these days."
"Good night, son." She kissed his cheek.
" 'Night, Mom."
"Sleep tight, son." Dad shook his hand.
"Same to you, Pop."
"It's good to have you home."
"It's good to be home."
He left the land of cigar smoke and perfume and books and gentle light and ascended the
stairs, talking, talking with Edward. Edward pushed a door open and there was the yellow brass
bed and the old semaphore banners from college days and a very musty raccoon coat which he
petted with strange, muted affection. "It's too much," he said faintly. "Like being in a thunder
shower without an umbrella. I'm soaked to the skin with emotion. I'm numb. I'm tired."
"A night's sleep between cool clean sheets for you, my bucko. Edward slapped wide the
snowy linens and flounced the pillows. Then he put up a window and let the night blooming
jasmine float in. There as moonlight and the sound of distant dancing and whispering.
"So this is Mars," said the captain undressing.
"So this is Mars." Edward undressed in idle, leisurely moves, drawing his shirt off over his
head, revealing golden shoulders and the good muscular neck.
The lights were out, they were into bed, side by side, as in the days, how many decades ago?
The captain lolled and was nourished by the night wind pushing the lace curtains out upon the
dark room air. Among the trees, upon a lawn, someone had cranked up a portable phonograph
and now it was playing softly, "I'll be loving you, always, with a love that's true, always."
The thought of Anna came to his mind. "Is Anna here?"
His brother, lying straight out in the moonlight from the window, waited and then said,
"Yes. She's out of town. But she'll be here in the morning."
The captain shut his eyes. "I want to see Anna very much."
The room was square and quiet except for their breathing. "Good night, Ed."
A pause. "Good night, John."
He lay peacefully, letting his thoughts float. For the first time the stress of the day was
moved aside, all of the excitement was calmed. He could think logically now. It had all been
emotion. The bands playing, the sight of familiar faces, the sick pounding of your heart. But—
now...
How? He thought. How was all this made? And why? For what purpose? Out of the
goodness of some kind God? Was God, then, really that fine and thoughtful of his children?
How and why and what for?
He thought of the various theories advanced in the first heat of the afternoon by Hinkston
and Lustig. He let all kinds of new theories drop m lazy pebbles down through his mind, as
through a dark water, now, turning, throwing out dull flashes of white light. Mars. Earth. Mom.
Dad. Edward. Mars. Martians.
Who had lived here a thousand years ago on Mars? Martians? Or had this always been like
this? Martians. He repeated the word quietly, inwardly.
He laughed out loud, almost. He had the most ridiculous theory, all of a sudden. It gave him a
kind of chilled feeling. It was really nothing to think of, of course. Highly improbable. Silly.
Forget it. Ridiculous.
But, he thought, just suppose. Just suppose now, that there were Martians living on Mars and
they saw our ship coming and saw us inside our ship and hated us. Suppose, now, just for the hell 
of it, that they wanted to destroy us, as invaders, as unwanted ones, and they wanted to do it in a
very clever way, so that we would be taken off guard Well, what would the best weapon be that a
Martian could use against Earthmen with atom weapons?
The answer was interesting. Telepathy, hypnosis, memory and imagination.
Suppose all these houses weren't real at all, this bed not real, but only figments of my own
imagination, given substance by telepathy and hypnosis by the Martians.
Suppose these houses are really some other shape, a Martian shape, but, by playing on my
desires and wants, these Martians have made this seem like my old home town, my old house,
to lull me out of my suspicions? What better way to fool a man, by his own emotions.
And suppose those two people in the next room, asleep, are not my mother and father at
all. But two Martians, incredibly brilliant, with the ability to keep me under this dreaming
hypnosis all of the time?
And that brass band, today? What a clever plan it would be. First, fool Lustig, then fool
Hinkston, then gather a crowd around the rocket ship and wave. And all the men in the ship,
seeing mothers, aunts, uncles, sweethearts dead ten, twenty years ago, naturally, disregarding
orders, would rush out and abandon the ship. What more natural? What more unsuspecting?
What more simple? A man doesn't ask too many questions when his mother is suddenly brought
back to life; he's much too happy. And the brass band played and everybody was taken off to
private homes. And here we all are, tonight, in various houses, in various beds, with no weapons
to protect us, and the rocket lies in the moonlight, empty. And wouldn't it be horrible and
terrifying to discover that all of this was part of some great clever plan by the Martians to divide
and conquer us, and kill us. Some time during the night, perhaps, my brother here on this bed,
will change form, melt, shift, and become a one-eyed, green and yellowtoothed Martian. It would
be very simple for him just to turn over in bed and put a knife into my heart. And in all those
other houses down the street a dozen other brothers or fathers suddenly melting away and taking
out knives and doing things to the unsuspecting, sleeping men of Earth.
His hands were shaking under the covers. His body was cold. Suddenly it was not a theory.
Suddenly he was very afraid. He lifted himself in bed and listened. The night was very quiet. The
music had stopped. The wind had died. His brother (?) lay sleeping beside him.
Very carefully he lifted the sheets, rolled them back. He slipped from bed and was walking
softly across the room when his brother's voice said, "Where are you going?"
"What?"
His brother's voice was quite cold. "I said, where do you think you're going?"
"For a drink of water."
"But you're not thirsty."
"Yes, yes, I am."
"No, you're not."
Captain John Black broke and ran across the room. He screamed. He screamed twice.
He never reached the door.
In the morning, the brass band played a mournful dirge. From every house in the street
came little solemn processions bearing long boxes and along the sun-filled street, weeping and
changing, came the grandmas and grandfathers and mothers and sisters and brothers, walking
to the churchyard, where there were open holes dug freshly and new tombstones installed.
Seventeen holes in all, and seventeen tombstones. Three of the tombstones said, CAPTAIN
JOHN BLACK, ALBERT LUSTIG, and SAMUEL HINKSTON. 
The mayor made a little sad speech, his face sometimes looking like the mayor,
sometimes looking like something else.
Mother and Father Black were there, with Brother Edward, and they cried, their faces
melting now from a familiar face into something else.
Grandpa and Grandma Lustig were there, weeping, their faces also shifting like wax,
shivering as a thing does in waves of heat on a summer day.
The coffins were lowered. Somebody murmured about "the unexpected and sudden
deaths of seventeen fine men during the night—"
Earth was shoveled in on the coffin tops.
After the funeral the brass band slammed and banged back into town and the crowd
stood around and waved and shouted as the rocket was torn to pieces and strewn about and
blown up. 