WHEN, about eight years ago, old Sir William Turton died and his son Basil
inherited The Turton Press (as well as the title), I can remember how they started
laying bets around Fleet Street as to how long it wouldbe before some nice young
woman managedto persuade the little fellow that she must look after him. That is
to say, him and his money.
The new Sir Basil Turton was maybe forty years old at the time, a bachelor,
a man of mild and simple character who up to then had shown no interest in
anything at all except his collection of modern paintings and sculpture. No woman
had disturbed him; no scandal or gossip had ever touched his name. But now that he
had become the proprietor of quite a large newspaper and magazine empire, it was
necessary for him to emerge from the calm of his father's country house and come
up to London.
Naturally, the vultures started gathering at once, and I believe that not
only Fleet Street but very nearly the whole of the city was looking on eagerly as
they scrambled for the body. It was slow motion, of course, deliberate and deadly
slow motion, and therefore not so much like vultures as a bunch of agile crabs
clawing for a piece of horsemeat under water.
But to everyone's surprise the little chap proved to be remarkably elusive,
and the chase dragged on right through the spring and early summer of that year. I
did not know Sir Basil personally, nor did I have any reason to feel friendly
towards him, but I couldn't help taking the side of my own sex and found myself
cheering loudly every time he managed to get himself off the hook.
Then, round about the beginning of August, apparently at some secret female
signal, the girls declared a sort of truce among themselves while they went
abroad, and rested, and regrouped, and made fresh plans for the winter kill. This
was a mistake because precisely at that moment a dazzling creature called Natalia
something or other, whom nobody had heard of before, swept in from the Continent,
took Sir Basil firmly by the wrist and led him off in a kind of swoon to the
Registry Office at Caxton Hall where she married him before anyone else, least of
all the bridegroom, realized what was happening.
You can imagine that the London ladies were indignant, and naturally they
started disseminating a vast amount of fruity gossip about the new Lady Turton
('That dirty poacher,' they called her). But we don't have to go into that. In
fact, for the purposes of this story we can skip the next six years, which brings
us right up to the present, to an occasion exactly one week ago today when I
myself had the pleasure of meeting her ladyship for the first time. By now, as you
must have guessed, she was not only running the whole of The Turton Press, but as
a result had become a considerable political force in the country. I realize that
other women have done this sort of thing before, but what made her particular case
unusual was the fact that she was a foreigner and that nobody seemed to know
precisely what country she came from--Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, or Russia.
So last Thursday I went to this small dinner party at a friend's in London,
and while we were standing around in the drawing-room before the meal, sipping
good Martinis and talking about the atom bomb and Mr Bevan, the maid popped her
head in to announce the last guest.
"Lady Turton," she said.
Nobody stopped talking; we were too well mannered for that. No heads were
turned. Only our eyes swung round to the door, waiting for the entrance.
She came in fast--tall and slim in a red-gold dress with sparkles on it--the
mouth smiling, the hand outstretched towards her hostess, and my heavens, I must
say she was a beauty.
"Mildred, good evening!"
"My dear Lady Turton! How nice!"
I believe we did stop talking then, and we turned and stared and stood
waiting quite meekly to be introduced, just like she might have been the Queen or
a famous film star. But she was better looking than either of those. The hair was
black, and to go with it she had one of those pale, oval, innocent fifteenthcentury Flemish faces, almost exactly a Madonna by Memling or Van Eyck. At least
that was the first impression. Later, when my turn came to shake hands, I got a
closer look and saw that except for the outline and colouring it wasn't really a
Madonna at all--far, far from it.
The nostrils for example were very odd, somehow more open, more flaring than
any I had seen before, and excessively arched. This gave the whole nose a kind of
open, snorting look that had something of the wild animal about it the mustang.
And the eyes when I saw them close, were not wide and round the way the
Madonna painters used to make them, but long and half-closed, half smiling, half
sullen, and slightly vulgar, so that in one way and another they gave her a most
delicately dissipated air. What's more they didn't look at you directly. They came
to you slowly from over on one side with a curious sliding motion that made me
nervous. I tried to see their colour, thought it was pale grey, but couldn't be
sure.
Then she was led away across the room to meet other people. I stood watching
her. She was clearly conscious of her success and of the way these Londoners were
deferring to her. 'Here am I,' she seemed to be saying, 'and I only came over a
few years ago, but already I am richer and more powerful than any of you.' There
was a little prance of triumph in her walk.
A few minutes later we went in to dinner, and to my surprise I found myself
seated at her ladyship's right. I presumed that our hostess had done this as a
kindness to me, thinking I might pick up some material for the social column I
Write each day in the evening paper. I settled myself down ready for an
interesting meal. But the famous lady took no notice of me at all; she spent her
time talking to the man on her left; the host. Until at last, just as I was
finishing my ice-cream, she suddenly turned, reached over, picked up my place card
and read the name. Then, with that queer sliding motion of the eyes she looked
into my face. I smiled and made a little bow. She didn't smile back, but started
shooting questions at me, rather personal questions--job, age, family, things like
that in a peculiar lapping voice, and I found myself answering as best I could.
During this inquisition it came out among other things that I was a lover of
painting and sculpture.
"Then you should come down to the country some time and see my husband's
collection." She said it casually, merely as a form of conversation, but you must
realize that in my job I cannot afford to lose an opportunity like this.
"How kind of you, Lady Turton. But I'd simply love to. When shall I come?"
Her head went up and she hesitated, frowned, shrugged her shoulders and then
said, "Oh I don't care. Any time."
"How about this next week-end? Would that be all right?"
The slow narrow eyes rested a moment on mine, then travelled away. "I
suppose so, if you wish. I don't care."
And that was how the following Saturday afternoon I came to be driving down
to Wooton with my suitcase in the back of the car. You may think that perhaps I
forced the invitation a bit, but I couldn't have got it any other way. And apart
from the professional aspect, I personally wanted very much to see the house. As
you know, Wooton is one of the truly great stone houses of the early English
Renaissance. Like its sisters, Longleat, Wollaton, and Montacute, it was built in
the latter half of the sixteenth Qentury when for the first time a great man's
house could be designed as a comfortable dwelling, not as a castle, and when a new
group of architects such as John Thorpe and the Smithsons were starting to do
marvellous things all over the country.
It lies south of Oxford, near a small town Qalled Princes Risborough not a
long trip from London--and as I swung in through the main gates the sky was
closing overhead nd the early winter evening was beginning.
I went slowly up the long drive, trying to see As much of the grounds as
possible, especially the famous topiary which I had heard such a bot about. And I
must say it was an impressive Sight. On all sides there were massive yew trees,
trimmed and clipped into many different Qomical shapes--hens, pigeons, bottles,
boots, , Armchairs, castles, egg-cups, lanterns, old women with flaring
petticoats, tall pillars, some crowned With a ball, others with big rounded roofs
and stemless mushroom finials--and in the half darkness the greens had turned to
black so that each figure, each tree, took on a dark, smooth Sculptural quality.
At one point I saw a lawn covered with gigantic chessmen, each a live yew tree,
marvellously fashioned. I stopped the car, got out and walked among them, and they
were twice as tall as me. What's more the set was complete, kings, queens,
bishops, knights, rooks and pawns standing in position as for the start of a game.
Around the next bend I saw the great grey house itself, and in front of it
the large entrance forecourt enclosed by a high balustraded wall with small
pillared pavilions at its outer angles. The piers of the balustrades were
surmounted by stone obelisks--the Italian influence on the Tudor mind--and a
flight of steps at least a hundred feet wide led up to the house.
As I drove into the forecourt I noticed with rather a shock that the
fountain basin in the middle supported a large statue by Epstein. A lovely thing,
mind you, but surely not in sympathy with its surroundings. Then, looking back as
I climbed the stairway to the front door, I saw that on all the little lawns and
terraces round about there were other modern statues and many kinds of curious
sculpture. In the distance I thought I recognized Gaudier Brzeska, Brancusi,
Saint-Gaudens, Henry Moore, and Epstein again.
The door was opened by a young footman who led me up to a bedroom on the
first floor. Her ladyship, he explained, was resting, so were the other guests,
but they would all be down in the main drawing-room in an hour or so, dressed for
dinner.
Now in my job it is necessary to do a lot of week-ending. I suppose I spend
around fifty Saturdays and Sundays a year in other people's houses, and as a
result I have become fairly sensitive to unfamiliar atmosphere. I can tell good or
bad almost by sniffing with my nose the moment I get in the front door; and this
one I was in now I did not like. The place smelled wrong. There was the faint,
desiccated whiff of something troublesome in the air; I was conscious of it even
as I lay steaming luxuriously in my great marble bath; and I couldn't help hoping
that no unpleasant things were going to happen before Monday came.
The first of them--though more of a surprise than an unpleasantness--
occurred ten minutes later. I was sitting on the bed putting on my socks when
softly the door opened, and an ancient lopsided gnome in black tails slid into the
room. He was the butler, he explained, and his name was Jelks, and he did so hope
I was comfortable and had everything I wanted.
I told him I was and had.
He said he would do all he could to make my week-end agreeable. I thanked
him and waited for him to go. He hesitated, and then, in a voice dripping with
unction, he begged permission to mention a rather delicate matter. I told him to
go ahead.
To be quite frank, he said, it was about tipping. The whole business of
tipping made him acutely miserable.
Oh? And why was that?
Well, if I really wanted to know, he didn't like the idea that his guests
felt under an obligation to tip him when they left the house--as indeed they did.
It was an undignified proceeding for the tipping and the tipped. Moreover, he was
well aware of the anguish that was often created in the minds of guests such as
myself, if I would pardon the liberty, who might feel compelled by convention to
give more than they could really afford.
He paused, and two small crafty eyes watched my face for a sign. I murmured
that he needn't worry himself about such things as far as I was concerned.
On the contrary, he said, he hoped sincerely that I would agree from the
beginning to give him no tip at all.
"Well," I said. "Let's not fuss about it now, and when the time comes we'll
see how we feel."
"No, sir!" he cried. "Please, I really must insist."
So I agreed.
He thanked me, and shuffled a step or two closer. Then, laying his head on
one side and clasping his hands before him like a priest, he gave a tiny
apologetic shrug of the shoulders. The small sharp eyes were still watching me,
and I waited, one sock on, the other in my hands, trying to guess what was coming
next.
All that he would ask, he said softly, so softly now that his voice was like
music heard faintly in the street outside a great concert hail, all that he would
ask was that instead of a tip I should give him thirty-three and a third per cent
of my winnings at cards over the week-end. If I lost there would be nothing to
pay. It was all so soft and smooth and sudden that I was not even surprised.
"Do they play a lot of cards, Jeiks?"
"Yes, sir, a great deal."
"Isn't thirty-three and a third a bit steep?"
"I don't think so, sir."
"I'll give you ten per cent."
"No, sir, I couldn't do that." He was now examining the finger-nails of his
left hand, and patiently frowning.
"Then we'll make it fifteen. All right?"
"Thirty-three and a third, sir. It's very reasonable. After all, sir, seeing
that I don't even know if you are a good player, what I'm actually doing, not
meaning to be personal, is backing a horse and I've never even seen it run."
No doubt you think I should never have started bargaining with the butler in
the first place, and perhaps you are right. But being a liberal-minded person, I
always try my best to be affable with the lower classes. Apart from that, the more
I thought about it, the more I had to admit to myself that it was an offer no
sportsman had the right to reject.
"All right then, Jeiks. As you wish."
"Thank you, sir." He moved towards the door, walking slowly sideways like a
crab; but once more he hesitated, a hand on the knob. "If I may give a little
advice, sir may I?"
"Yes?"
"It's simply that her ladyship tends to overbid her hand."
Now this was going too far. I was so startled I dropped my sock. After all,
it's one thing to have a harmless little sporting arrangement with the butler
about tipping, but when he begins conniving with you to take money away from the
hostess then it's time to call a halt.
"All right Jeiks. Now that'll do."
"No offence, sir, I hope. All I mean is you're bound to be playing against
her ladyship. She always partners Major Haddock."
"Major Haddock? You mean Major Jack Haddock?"
"Yes, sir."
I noticed there was a trace of a sneer around the corner of Jelks's nose
when he spoke about this man. And it was worse with Lady Turton. Each time he said
'her ladyship' he spoke the words with the outsides of his lips as though he were
nibbling a lemon, and there was a subtle, mocking inflection in his voice.
"You'll excuse me now, sir. Her ladyship will be down at seven o'clock. So
will Major Haddock and the others." He slipped out of the door leaving behind him
a certain dampness in the room and a faint smell of embrocation.
Shortly after seven, I found my way to the main drawing-room, and Lady
Turton, as beautiful as ever, got up to greet me.
"I wasn't even sure you were coming," she said in that peculiar lilting
voice. "What's your name again?"
"I'm afraid I took you at your word, Lady Turton. I hope it's all right."
"Why not?" she said. "There's forty-seven bedrooms in the house. This is my
husband." A small man came around the back of her and said, "You know, I'm so glad
you were able to come." He had a lovely warm smile and when he took my hand I felt
instantly a touch of friendship in his fingers.
"And Carmen La Rosa," Lady Turton said.
This was a powerfully built woman who looked as though she might have
something to do with horses. She nodded at me, and although my hand was already
half-way out she didn't give me hers, thus forcing me to convert the movement into
a noseblow.
"You have a cold?" she said. "I'm sorry."
I did not like this Miss Carmen La Rosa.
"And this is Jack Haddock."
I knew this man slightly. He was a director of companies (whatever that may
mean), and a well-known member of society. I had used his name a few times in my
column, but I had never liked him, and this I think was mainly because I have a
deep suspicion of all people who carry their military titles back with them into
private life-especially majors and colonels. Standing there in his dinner-jacket
with his full-blooded animal face and black eyebrows and large white teeth, he
looked so handsome there was almost something indecent about it. He had a way of
raising his upper lip when he smiled, baring his teeth, and he was smiling now as
he gave me a hairy brown hand.
"I hope you're going to say some nice things about us in your column."
"He better had," Lady Turton said, "or I'll say some nasty ones about him on
my front page."
I laughed, but all three of them, Lady Turton, Major Haddock, and Carmen La
Rosa had already turned away and were settling themselves back on the sofa. Jelks
gave me a drink, and Sir Basil drew me gently aside for a quiet chat at the other
end of the room. Every now and then Lady Turton would call her husband to fetch
her something--another Martini, a cigarette, an ashtray, a handkerchief--and he,
half rising from his chair, would be forestalled by the watchful Jelks who fetched
it for him.
Clearly, Jeiks loved his master; and just as clearly he hated the wife. Each
time he did something for her he made a little sneer with his nose and drew his
lips together so they puckered like a turkey's bottom.
At dinner, our hostess sat her two friends, Haddock and La Rosa, on either
side of her. This unconventional arrangement left Sir Basil and me at the other
end of the table where we were able to continue our pleasant talk about painting
and sculpture. Of course it was obvious to me by now that the Major was infatuated
with her ladyship. And again, although I hate to say it, it seemed as though the
La Rosa woman was hunting the same bird.
All this foolishness appeared to delight the hostess. But it did not delight
her husband. I could see that he was conscious of the little scene all the time we
were talking; and often his mind would wander from our subject and he would stop
short in mid-sentence, his eyes travelling down to the other end of the table to
settle pathetically for a moment on that lovely head with the black hair and the
curiously flaring nostrils. He must have noticed then how exhilarated she was, how
the hand that gestured as she spoke rested every now and again on the Major's arm,
and how the other woman, the one who perhaps had something to do with horses, kept
saying, "Nata-li-a? Now Nata-li-a, listen to me!"
"Tomorrow," I said, "you must take me round and show me the sculptures
you've put up in the garden."
"Of course," he said, "with pleasure." He glanced again at the wife, and his
eyes had a sort of supplicating look that was piteous beyond words. He was so mild
and passive a man in every way that even now I could see there was no anger in
him, no danger, no chance of an explosion.
After dinner I was ordered straight to the card table to partner Miss Carmen
La Rosa against Major Haddock and Lady Turton. Sir Basil sat quietly on the sofa
with a book.
There was nothing unusual about the game itself; it was routine and rather
dull. But Jeiks was a nuisance. All evening he prowled around us, emptying
ashtrays and asking about drinks and peering at our hands. He was obviously shortsighted and I doubt whether he saw much of what was going on because as you may or
may not know, here in England no butler has ever been permitted to wear spectacles
nor for that matter, a moustache. This is the golden, unbreakable rule and a very
sensible one it is too, although I'm not quite sure what lies behind it. I presume
that a moustache would make him look too much like a gentleman, and spectacles too
much like an American, and where would we be then I should like to know? In any
event Jelks was a nuisance all evening; and so was Lady Turton who was constantly
called to the phone on newspaper business.
At eleven o'clock she looked up from her cards and said, "Basil, it's time
you went to bed."
"Yes, my dear, perhaps it is." He closed the book, got up, and stood for a
minute watching the play. "Are you having a good game?" he asked.
The others didn't answer him so I said, "It's a nice game."
"I'm so glad. And Jeiks will look after you and get anything you want."
"Jelks can go to bed too," the wife said.
I could hear Major Haddock breathing through his nose beside me, and the
soft drop of the cards one by one on to the table, and then the sound of Jeiks's
feet shuffling over the carpet towards us.
"You wouldn't prefer me to stay, m'lady?"
"No. Go to bed. You too, Basil."
"Yes, my dear. Good night. Good night all."
Jeiks opened the door for him, and he went slowly out followed by the
butler.
As soon as the next rubber was over, I said that I too wanted to go to bed.
"All right," Lady Turton said. "Good night."
I went up to my room, locked the door, took a pill, and went to sleep.
The next morning, Sunday, I got up and dressed around ten o'clock and went
down to the breakfast-room. Sir Basil was there before me, and Jeiks was serving
him with grilled kidneys and bacon and fried tomatoes. He was delighted to see me
and suggested that as soon as we had finished eating we should take a long walk
around the grounds. I told him nothing would give me more pleasure.
Half an hour later we started out, and you've no idea what a relief it was
to get away from that house and into the open air. It was one of those warm
shining days that come occasionally in mid-winter after a night of heavy rain,
with a bright surprising sun and not a breath of wind. Bare trees seemed beautiful
in the sunlight, water still dripping from the branches, and wet places all around
were sparkling with diamonds. The sky had small faint clouds.
"What a lovely day!"
"Yes--isn't it a lovely day!"
We spoke hardly another word during the walk; it wasn't necessary. But he
took me everywhere and I saw it all--the huge chessmen and all the rest of the
topiary. The elaborate garden houses, the pools, the fountains, the children's
maze whose hedges were hornbeam and lime so that it was only good in summer when
the leaves were out, and the parterres, the rockeries, the greenhouses with their
vines and nectarine trees. And of course, the sculpture. Most of the contemporary
European sculptors were there, in bronze, granite, limestone, and wood; and
although it was a pleasure to see them warming and glowing in the sun, to me they
still looked a trifle out of place in these vast formal surroundings.
"Shall we rest here now a little while?" Sir Basil said after we had walked
for more than half an hour. So we sat down on a white bench beside a water-lily
pond full of carp and goldfish, and lit cigarettes. We were some way from the
house, on a piece of ground that was raised above its surroundings, and from where
we sat the gardens were spread out below us like a drawing in one of those old
books on garden architecture, with the hedges and lawns and terraces and fountains
making a pretty pattern of squares and rings.
"My father bought this place just before I was born," Sir Basil said. "I've
lived here ever since, and I know every inch of it. Each day I grow to love it
more."
"It must be wonderful in summer."
"Oh, but it is. You should come down and see it in May and June. Will you
promise to do that?"
"Of course," I said. "I'd love to come," and as I spoke I was watching the
figure of a woman dressed in red moving among the flower-beds in the far distance.
I saw her cross over a wide expanse of lawn, and there was a lilt in her walk, a
little shadow attending her, and when she was over the lawn, she turned left and
went along one side of a high wall of clipped yew until she came to another
smaller lawn that was circular and had in its centre a piece of sculpture.
"This garden is younger than the house," Sir Basil said. "It was laid out
early in the eighteenth century by a Frenchman called Beaumont, the same fellow
who did Levens, in Westmorland. For at least a year he had two hundred and fifty
men working on it."
The woman in the red dress had been joined now by a man, and they were
standing face to face, about a yard apart, in the very centre of the whole garden
panorama, on this little circular patch of lawn, apparently conversing. The man
had some small black object in his hand.
"If you're interested I'll show you the bills that Beaumont put in to the
Duke while he was making it."
"I'd like very much to see them. They must be fascinating."
"He paid his labourers a shilling a day and they worked ten hours."
In the clear sunlight it was not difficult to follow the movements and
gestures of the two figures on the lawn. They had turned now towards the piece of
sculpture, and were pointing at it in a sort of mocking way, apparently laughing
and making jokes about its shape. I recognized it as being one of the Henry
Moores, done in wood, a thin smooth object of singular beauty that had two or
three holes in it and a number of strange limbs protruding.
"When Beaumont planted the yew trees for the chess-men and the other things,
he knew they wouldn't amount to much for at least a hundred years. We don't seem
to possess that sort of patience in our planning these days, do we? What do you
think?"
"No," I said. "We don't."
The black object in the man's hand turned out to be a camera, and now he had
stepped back and was taking pictures of the woman beside the Henry Moore. She was
striking a number of different poses, all of them, so far as I could see,
ludicrous and meant to be amusing. Once she put her arms around one of the
protruding wooden limbs and hugged it, and another time she climbed up and sat
side-saddle on the thing, holding imaginary reins in her hands. A great wall of
yew hid these two people from the house, and indeed from all the rest of the
garden except the little hill on which we sat. They had every right to believe
they were not overlooked, and even if they had happened to glance our way--which
was into the sun--I doubt whether they would have noticed the two small motionless
figures sitting on the bench beside the pond.
"You know, I love these yews." Sir Basil said. "The colour of them is so
wonderful in a garden because it rests the eye. And in the summer it breaks up the
areas of brilliance into little patches and makes them more comfortable to admire.
Have you noticed the different shades of greens on the planes and facets of each
clipped tree?"
"It's lovely, isn't it."
The man now seemed to be explaining something to the woman, and pointing at
the Henry Moore, and I could tell by the way they threw back their heads that they
were laughing again. The man continued to point, and then the woman walked around
the back of the wood carving, bent down and poked her head through one of its
holes. The thing was about the size, shall I say, of a small horse, but thinner
than that, and from where I sat I could see both sides of it--to the left, the
woman's body, to the right, her head protruding through. It was very much like one
of those jokes at the seaside where you put your head through a hole in a board
and get photographed as a fat lady. The man was photographing her now.
"There's another thing about yews," Sir Basil said. "In the early summer
when the young shoots come out... " At that moment he paused and sat up straighter
and leaned slightly forward, and I could sense his whole body suddenly stiffening.
"Yes," I said, "when the young shoots come out?"
The man had taken the photograph, but the woman still had her head through
the hole, and now I saw him put both hands (as well as the camera) behind his back
and advance towards her. Then he bent forward so his face was close to hers,
touching it, and he held it there while he gave her, I suppose, a few kisses or
something like that. In the stillness that followed, I fancied I heard a faint
faraway tinkle of female laughter coming to us through the sunlight across the
garden.
"Shall we go back to the house?" I asked.
"Back to the house?"
"Yes, shall we go back and have a drink before lunch?"
"A drink? Yes, we'll have a drink." But he didn't move. He sat very still,
gone far away from me now, staring intently at the two figures. I also was staring
at them. I couldn't take my eyes away; I had to look. It was like seeing a
dangerous little ballet in miniature from a great distance, and you knew the
dancers and the music but not the end of the story, not the choreography, nor what
they were going to do next, and you were fascinated, and you had to look.
"Gaudier Brzeska," I said. "How great do you think he might've become if he
hadn't died so young?"
"Who?"
"Gaudier Brzeska."
"Yes," he said. "Of course."
I noticed now that something queer was happening. The woman still had her
head through the hole, but she was beginning to wriggle her body from side to side
in a slow unusual manner, and the man was standing motionless, a pace or so away
watching her. He seemed suddenly uneasy the way he stood there, and I could tell
by the drop of the head and by the stiff intent set of the body that there was no
laughter in him any more. For a while he remained still, then I saw him place his
camera on the ground and go forward to the woman, taking her head in his hands;
and all at once it was more like a puppet show than a ballet, with tiny wooden
figures performing tiny, jerky movements, crazy and unreal, on a faraway sunlit
stage. We sat quietly together on the white bench, and we watched while the tiny
puppet man began to manipulate the woman's head with his hands. He was doing it
gently, there was no doubt about that, slowly and gently, stepping back every now
and then to think about it some more, and several times crouching down to survey
the situation from another angle. Whenever he left her alone the woman would start
to wriggle her body, and the peculiar way she did it reminded me of a dog that
feels a collar round its neck for the first time.
"She's stuck," Sir Basil said.
And now the man was walking to the other side of the carving, the side where
the woman's body was, and he put out his hands and began trying to do something
with her neck. Then, as though suddenly exasperated, he gave the neck two or three
jerky pulls, and this time the sound of a woman's voice, raised high in anger, or
pain, or both, came back to us small and clear through the sunlight.
Out of the corner of one eye I could see Sir Basil nodding his head quietly
up and down. "I got my fist caught in a jar of boiled sweets once," he said, "and
I couldn't get it out."
The man retreated a few yards, and was standing with hands on hips, head up,
looking furious and sullen. The woman, from her uncomfortable position, appeared
to be talking to him, or rather shouting at him, and although the body itself was
pretty firmly fixed and could only wriggle, the legs were free and did a good deal
of moving and stamping. "I broke the jar with a hammer and told my mother I'd
knocked it off the shelf by mistake." He seemed calmer now, not tense at all,
although his voice was curiously flat. "I suppose we'd better go down and see if
we can help."
"Perhaps we should."
But still he didn't move. He took out a cigarette and lit it, putting the
used match carefully back in the box.
"I'm sorry," he said. "Will you have one?"
"Thanks, I think I will." He made a little ceremony of giving me the
cigarette and lighting it for me, and again he put the used match back in the box.
Then we got up and walked slowly down the grass slope.
We came upon them silently, through an archway in the yew hedge, and it was
naturally quite a surprise.
"What's the matter here?" Sir Basil asked. He spoke softly, with a dangerous
softness that I'm sure his wife had never heard before.
"She's gone and put her head through the hole and now she can't get it out,"
Major Haddock said. "Just for a lark, you know."
"For a what?"
"Basil!" Lady Turton shouted, "Don't be such a damn fool! Do something,
can't you!" She may not have been able to move much, but she could still talk.
"Pretty obvious we're going to have to break up this lump of wood," the
Major said. There was a small smudge of red on his grey moustache, and this, like
the single extra touch of colour that ruins a perfect painting, managed somehow to
destroy all his manly looks. It made him comic.
"You mean break the Henry Moore?"
"My dear sir, there is no other way of setting the lady free. God knows how
she managed to squeeze it in, but I know for a fact that she can't pull it out.
It's the ears get in the way."
"Oh dear," Sir Basil said. "What a terrible pity. My beautiful Henry Moore."
At this stage Lady Turton began abusing her husband in a most unpleasant
manner, and there's no knowing how long it would have gone on had not Jeiks
suddenly appeared out of the shadows. He came sidling silently on to the lawn and
stationed himself at a respectful distance from Sir Basil, as though awaiting
instructions. His black clothes looked perfectly ridiculous in the morning
sunlight, and with his ancient pink-white face and white hands he was like some
small crabby animal that has lived all its life in a hole under the ground.
"Is there anything I can do, Sir Basil?" He kept his voice level, but I
didn't think his face was quite straight. When he looked at Lady Turton there was
a little exulting glimmer in his eyes.
"Yes Jelks, there is. Go back and get me a saw or something so I can cut out
this section of wood."
"Shall I call one of the men, Sir Basil? William is a good carpenter."
"No, I'll do it myself. Just get the tools and hurry."
While they were waiting for Jelks, I strolled away because I didn't want to
hear any more of the things that Lady Turton was saying to her husband. But I was
back in time to see the butler returning, followed now by the other woman, Carmen
La Rosa, who made a rush for the hostess.
"Nata-Ji-a! My dear Nata-li-a! What have they done to you?"
"Oh shut up," the hostess said. "And get out of the way, will you."
Sir Basil took up a position close to his lady's head, waiting for Jelks.
Jeiks advanced slowly, carrying a saw in one hand, an axe in the other, and he
stopped maybe a yard away. Then he held out both implements in front of him so his
master could choose, and there was a brief moment--no more than two or three
seconds--of silence, and of waiting, and it just happened that I was watching
Jelks at this time. I saw the hand that was carrying the axe come forward an extra
fraction of an inch towards Sir Basil. It was so slight a movement it was barely
noticeable--a tiny pushing forward of the hand, slow and secret, a little offer, a
little coaxing offer that was accompanied perhaps by an infinitesimal lift of the
eyebrow.
I'm not sure whether Sir Basil saw it, but be hesitated, and again the hand
that held the axe came edging forward, and it was almost exactly like that card
trick where the man says 'Take one, whichever one you want,' and you always get
the one he means you to have. Sir Basil got the axe. I saw him reach out in a
dreamy sort of way, accepting it from Jeiks, and then, the instant he felt the
handle in his grasp he seemed to realize what was required of him and he sprang to
life.
For me, after that, it was like the awful moment when you see a child
running out into the road and a car is coming and all you can do is shut your eyes
tight and wait until the noise tells you it has happened. The moment of waiting
becomes a long lucid period of time with yellow and red spots dancing on a black
field, and even if you open your eyes again and find that nobody has been killed
or hurt, it makes no difference because so far as you and your stomach were
concerned you saw it all.
I saw this one all right, every detail of it, and I didn't open my eyes
again until I heard Sir Basil's voice, even softer than usual, calling in gentle
protest to the butler.
"Jeiks," he was saying, and I looked and saw him standing there as calm as
you please, still holding the axe. Lady Turton's head was there too, still
sticking through the hole, but her face had turned a terrible ashy grey, and the
mouth was opening and shutting making a kind of gurgling sound.
"Look here, Jeiks," Sir Basil was saying. "What on earth are you thinking
about. This thing's much too dangerous. Give me the saw." And as he exchanged
implements I noticed for the first time two little warm roses of colour appearing
on his cheeks, and above them, all around the corners of his eyes, the twinkling
tiny wrinkles of a smile.