On Sunday morning Leo Auffmann moved slowly through his garage, expecting some wood, a
curl of wire, a hammer or wrench to leap up crying, “Start here!” But nothing leaped, nothing cried
for a beginning.
Should a Happiness Machine, he wondered, be something you can carry in your pocket?
Or, he went on, should it be something that carries you in its pocket?
“One thing I absolutely know,” he said aloud. “It should be bright!”
He set a can of orange paint in the center of the workbench, picked up a dictionary, and
wandered into the house.
“Lena?” He glanced at the dictionary. “Are you ‘pleased, contented, joyful, delighted’? Do you
feel ‘Lucky, fortunate’? Are things ‘clever and fitting,’ ’successful and suitable’ for you?”
Lena stopped slicing vegetables and closed her eyes. “Read me the list again, please,” she said.
He shut the book.
“What have I done, you got to stop and think an hour before you can tell me. All I ask is a simple
yes or no! You’re not contented, delighted, joyful?”
“Cows are contented, babies and old people in second childhood are delighted, God help them,”
she said. “As for ‘joyful,’ Lee? Look how I laugh scrubbing out the sink . . .”
He peered closely at her and his face relaxed. “Lena, it’s true. A man doesn’t appreciate. Next
month, maybe, we’ll get away.”
“I’m not complaining!” she cried. “I’m not the one comes in with a list saying,’stick out your
tongue. Lee, do you ask what makes your heart beat all night? No! Next will you ask, What’s
marriage? Who knows, Lee? Don’t ask. A man who thinks like that, how it runs, how things work,
falls off the trapeze in the circus, chokes wondering how the muscles work in the throat. Eat, sleep,
breathe, Lee, and stop staring at me like I’m something new in the house!”
Lena Auffmann froze. She sniffed the air.
“Oh, my God, look what you done!”
She yanked the oven door open. A great cloud of smoke poured through the kitchen.
“Happiness!” she wailed. “And for the first time in six months we have a fight! Happiness, and
for the first time in twenty years it’s not bread, it’s charcoal for supper!”
When the smoke cleared, Leo Auffmann was gone.
The fearful clangor, the collision of man and inspiration, the flinging about of metal, lumber,
hammer, nails, T square, screwdriver, continued for many days. On occasion, defeated, Leo Auffmann
loitered out through the streets, nervous, apprehensive, jerking his head at the slightest sound of
distant laughter, listened to children’s jokes, watching what made them smile. At night he sat on
neighbors’ crowded porches, listening to the old folks weigh and balance life, and at each explosion
of merriment Leo Auffmann quickened like a general who has seen the forces of darkness routed and
whose strategy has been reaffirmed. On his way home he felt triumphant until he was in his garage
with the dead tools and the inanimate lumber. Then his bright face fell away in a pale funk, and to
cover his sense of failure he banged and crashed the parts of his machine about as if they really did
make sense. At last it began to shape itself and at the end of the ten days and nights, trembling with
fatigue, self-dedicated, half starved, fumbling and looking as if he had been riven by lightning Leo
Auffmann wandered into his house.
The children, who had been screaming horribly at each other, fell silent, as if the Red Death had
entered at the chiming of the clock.
“The Happiness Machine,” husked Leo Auffmann, “is ready.”
“Lee Auffmann,” said his wife, “has lost fifteen pounds. He hasn’t talked to his children in two
weeks, they are nervous, they fight, listen! His wife is nervous, she’s gained ten pounds, she’ll need
new clothes, look! Sure—the machine is ready. But happy? Who can say? Lee, leave off with the
clock you’re building. You’ll never find a cuckoo big enough to go in it! Man was not made to tamper
with such things. It’s not against God, no, but it sure looks like it’s against Leo Auffmann. Another
week of this and we’ll bury him in his machine!”
But Leo Auffmann was too busy noticing that the room was falling swiftly up.
How interesting, he thought, lying on the floor.
Darkness closed in a great wink on him as someone screamed something about that Happiness
Machine, three times.
The first thing he noticed the next morning was dozens of birds fluttering around in the air
stirring up ripples like colored stones thrown into an incredibly clear stream, gonging the tin roof of
the garage softly.
A pack of multibred dogs pawfooted one by one into the yard to peer and whine gently through
the garage door; four boys, two girls, and some men hesitated in the driveway and then edged along
under the cherry trees.
Leo Auffmann, listening, knew what it was that had reached out and called them all into the yard.
The sound of the Happiness Machine.
It was the sort of sound that might be heard coming from a giant’s kitchen on a summer day.
There were all kinds of hummings, low and high, steady and then changing. Incredible foods were
being baked there by a host of whirring golden bees as big as teacups. The giantess herself, humming
contentedly under her breath, might glide to the door, as vast as all summer, her face a huge peachcolored moon gazing calmly out upon smiling dogs, corn-haired boys and flour-haired old men.
“Wait,” said Leo Auffmann out loud. “I didn’t turn the machine on this morning! Saul!”
Saul, standing in the yard below, looked up.
“Saul, did you turn it on?”
“You told me to warm it up half an hour ago!”
“All right, Saul, I forgot. I’m not awake.” He fell back in bed.
His wife, bringing his breakfast up, paused by the window, looking down at the garage.
“Tell me,” she said quietly. “If that machine is like you say, has it got an answer to making
babies in it somewhere? Can that machine make seventy-year-old people twenty? Also, how does
death look when you hide in there with all that happiness?”
“Hide!”
“If you died from overwork, what should I do today, climb in that big box down there and be
happy? Also tell me, Lee, how is our life? You know how our house is. Seven in the morning,
breakfast, the kids; all of you gone by eight thirty and it’s just me and washing and me and cooking
and socks to be darned, weeds to be dug, or I run to the store or polish silver. Who’s complaining?
I’m just reminding you how the house is put together, Lee, what’s in it! So now answer: How do you
get all those things I said in one machine?”
“That’s not how it’s built!”
“I’m sorry. I got no time to look, then.”
And she kissed his cheek and went from the room and he lay smelling the wind that blew from
the hidden machine below, rich with the odor of those roasted chestnuts that sold in the autumn streets
of a Paris he had never known . . .
A cat moved unseen among the hypnotized dogs and boys to purr against the garage door, in the
sound of snow-waves crumbling down a faraway and rhythmically breathing shore.
Tomorrow, thought Leo Auffmann, we’ll try the machine, all of us, together.
Late that night he awoke and knew something had wakened him. Far away in another room he
heard someone crying. “Saul?” he whispered, getting out of bed.
In his room Saul wept, his head buried in his pillow. “No . . .no . . .” he sobbed. “Over . . .
over . . .”
Saul, you had a nightmare? Tell me about it, son.” But the boy only wept.
And sitting there on the boy’s bed, Leo Auffmann suddenly thought to look out the window.
Below, the garage doors stood open.
He felt the hairs rise along the back of his neck.
When Saul slept again, uneasily, whimpering, his father went downstairs and out to the garage
where, not breathing, he put his hand out.
In the cool night the Happiness Machine’s metal was too hot to touch.
So, he thought, Saul was here tonight.
Why? Was Saul unhappy, in need of the machine? No, happy, but wanting to hold onto happiness
always. Could you blame a boy wise enough to know his position who tried to keep it that way? No!
And yet . . .
Above, quite suddenly, something white was exhaled from Saul’s window. Leo Auffmann’s heart
thundered. Then he realized the window curtain had blown out into the open night. But it had seemed
as intimate and shimmering a thing as a boy’s soul escaping his room. And Leo Auffmann had flung up
his hands as if to thwart it, push it back into the sleeping house.
Cold, shivering, he moved back into the house and up to Saul’s room where he seized the
blowing curtain in and locked the window tight so the pale thing could not escape again. Then he sat
on the bed and put his hand on Saul’s back.
A Tale of Two Cities? Mine. The Old Curiosity Shop? Ha, that’s Leo Auffmann’s all right! Great
Expectations? That used to be mine. But let Great Expectations be his, now!”
“What’s this?” asked Leo Auffmann, entering.
“This,” said his wife, “is sorting out the community property! When a father scares his son at
night it’s time to chop everything in half! Out of the way, Mr. Bleak House, Old Curiosity Shop. In all
these books, no mad scientist lives like Leo Auffmann, none!”
“You’re leaving, and you haven’t even tried the machine!” he protested. “Try it once, you’ll
unpack, you’ll stay!”
“Tom Swift and His Electric Annihilator—whose is that?” she asked. “Must I guess?”
Snorting, she gave Tom Swift to Leo Auffmann.
Very late in the day all the books, dishes, clothes, linens had been stacked one here, one there,
four here, four there, ten here, ten there. Lena Auffmann, dizzy with counting, had to sit down. “All
right,” she gasped. “Before I go, Lee, prove you don’t give nightmares to innocent sons!”
Silently Leo Auffmann led his wife into the twilight. She stood before the eight-foot-tall, orangecolored box.
“That’s happiness?” she said. “Which button do I press to be overjoyed, grateful, contented, and
much-obliged?”
The children had gathered now.
“Mama,” said Saul, “don’t!”
“I got to know what I’m yelling about, Saul.” She got in the machine, sat down, and looked out at
her husband, shaking her head. “It’s not me needs this, it’s you, a nervous wreck, shouting.”
“Please,” he said, “you’ll see!”
He shut the door.
“Press the button!” he shouted in at his unseen wife.
There was a click. The machine shivered quietly, like a huge dog dreaming in its sleep.
“Papa!” said Saul, worried.
“Listen!” said Leo Auffmann.
At first there was nothing but the tremor of the machine’s own secretly moving cogs and wheels.
“Is Mama all right?” asked Naomi.
“All right, she’s fine! There, now . . . there!”
And inside the machine Lena Auffmann could be heard saying, “Oh!” and then again, “Ah!” in a
startled voice. “Look at that!” said his hidden wife. “Paris!” and later, “London! There goes Rome!
The Pyramids! The Sphinx!” “The Sphinx, you hear, children?” Leo Auffmann whispered and
laughed.
“Perfume!” cried Lena Auffmann, surprised.
Somewhere a phonograph played “The Blue Danube” faintly.
“Music! I’m dancing!”
“Only thinks she’s dancing” the father confided to the world.
“Amazing!” said the unseen woman.
Leo Auffmann blushed. “What an understanding wife.”
And then inside the Happiness Machine, Lena Auffmann began to weep.
The inventor’s smile faded.
“She’s crying” said Naomi.
“She can’t be!”
“She is,” said Saul.
“She simply can’t be crying!” Leo Auffmann, blinking, pressed his ear to the machine.
“But . . .yes . . .like a baby . . .”
He could only open the door.
“Wait.” There his wife sat, tears rolling down her cheeks. “Let me finish.” She cried some more.
Leo Auffmann turned off the machine, stunned.
“Oh, it’s the saddest thing in the world!” she wailed. “I feel awful, terrible.” She climbed out
through the door “First, there was Paris . . .”
“What’s wrong with Paris?”
“I never even thought of being in Paris in my life. But now you got me thinking: Paris! So
suddenly I want to be in Paris and I know I’m not!”
“It’s almost as good, this machine.”
“No. Sitting in there, I knew. I thought, it’s not real!”
“Stop crying, Mama.”
She looked at him with great dark wet eyes. “You had me dancing. We haven’t danced in twenty
years.”
“I’ll take you dancing tomorrow night!”
“No, no! It’s not important, it shouldn’t be important. But your machine says it’s important! So I
believe! It’ll be all right, Lee, after I cry some more.”
“What else?”
“What else? The machine says, ‘You’re young.’ I’m not. It lies, that Sadness Machine!”
“Sad in what way?”
His wife was quieter now. “Lee, the mistake you made is you forgot some hour, some day, we all
got to climb out of that thing and go back to dirty dishes and the beds not made. While you’re in that
thing, sure, a sunset lasts forever almost, the air smells good, the temperature is fine. All the things
you want to last, last. But outside, the children wait on lunch, the clothes need buttons. And then let’s
be frank, Lee, how long can you look at a sunset? Who wants a sunset to last? Who wants perfect
temperature? Who wants air smelling good always? So after awhile, who would notice? Better, for a
minute or two, a sunset. After that, let’s have something else. People are like that, Lee. How could
you forget?”
“Did I?”
“Sunsets we always liked because they only happen once and go away.”
“But Lena, that’s sad.”
“No, if the sunset stayed and we got bored, that would be a real sadness. So two things you did
you should never have. You made quick things go slow and stay around. You brought things faraway
to our backyard where they don’t belong, where they just tell you, ‘No, you’ll never travel, Lena
Auffmann, Paris you’ll never see! Pome you’ll never visit.’ But I always knew that, so why tell me?
Better to forget and make do, Lee, make do, eh?”
Leo Auffmann leaned against the machine for support. He snatched his burned hand away,
surprised.
“So now what, Lena?” he said.
“It’s not for me to say. I know only so long as this thing is here I’ll want to come out, or Saul
will want to come out like he did last night, and against our judgment sit in it and look at all those
places so far away and every time we will cry and be no fit family for you.”
“I don’t understand,” he said, “how I could be so wrong. Just let me check to see what you say is
true.” He sat down inside the machine. “You won’t go away?”
His wife nodded. “We’ll wait, Lee.”
He shut the door. In the warm darkness he hesitated, pressed the button, and was just relaxing
back in color and music, when he heard someone screaming.
“Fire, Papa! The machine’s on fire!”
Someone hammered the door. He leaped up, bumped his head, and fell as the door gave way and
the boys dragged him out. Behind him he heard a muffled explosion. The entire family was running
now. Leo Auffmann turned and gasped, “Saul, call the fire department!”
Lena Auffmann caught Saul as he ran. “Saul,” she said. “Wait.”
There was a gush of flame, another muffled explosion. When the machine was burning very well
indeed, Lena Auffmann nodded.
“All right, Saul,” she said. “Run call the fire department.”
