The store in which the justice of the Peace's court was sitting smelled of cheese. The boy, crouched on
his nail keg at the back of the crowded room, knew he smelled cheese, and more: from where he sat he
could see the ranked shelves close-packed with the solid, squat, dynamic shapes of tin cans whose
labels his stomach read, not from the lettering which meant nothing to his mind but from the scarlet devils
and the silver curve of fish - this, the cheese which he knew he smelled and the hermetic meat which his
intestines believed he smelled coming in intermittent gusts momentary and brief between the other
constant one, the smell and sense just a little of fear because mostly of despair and grief, the old fierce
pull of blood. He could not see the table where the Justice sat and before which his father and his father's
enemy (our enemy he thought in that despair; ourn! mine and hisn both! He's my father!) stood, but he
could hear them, the two of them that is, because his father had said no word yet:
"But what proof have you, Mr. Harris?"
"I told you. The hog got into my corn. I caught it up and sent it back to him. He had no fence that would
hold it. I told him so, warned him. The next time I put the hog in my pen. When he came to get it I gave
him enough wire to patch up his pen. The next time I put the hog up and kept it. I rode down to his house
and saw the wire I gave him still rolled on to the spool in his yard. I told him he could have the hog when
he paid me a dollar pound fee. That evening a nigger came with the dollar and got the hog. He was a
strange nigger. He said, 'He say to tell you wood and hay kin burn.' I said, 'What?' 'That whut he say to
tell you,' the nigger said. 'Wood and hay kin burn.' That night my barn burned. I got the stock out but I lost
the barn."
"Where is the nigger? Have you got him?"
"He was a strange nigger, I tell you. I don't know what became of him."
"But that's not proof. Don't you see that's not proof?"
"Get that boy up here. He knows." For a moment the boy thought too that the man meant his older brother
until Harris said, "Not him. The little one. The boy," and, crouching, small for his age, small and wiry like
his father, in patched and faded jeans even too small for him, with straight, uncombed, brown hair and
eyes gray and wild as storm scud, he saw the men between himself and the table part and become a lane
of grim faces, at the end of which he saw the justice, a shabby, collarless, graying man in spectacles,
beckoning him. He felt no floor under his bare feet; he seemed to walk beneath the palpable weight of the
grim turning faces. His father, stiff in his black Sunday coat donned not for the trial but for the moving, did
not even look at him. He aims for me to lie, he thought, again with that frantic grief and despair. And I will
have to do hit.
"What's your name, boy?" the justice said.
"Colonel Sartoris Snopes," the boy whispered.
"Hey?" the Justice said. "Talk louder. Colonel Sartoris? I reckon anybody named for Colonel Sartoris in
this country can't help but tell the truth, can they?" The boy said nothing. Enemy! Enemy! he thought; for a
moment he could not even see, could not see that the justice's face was kindly nor discern that his voice
was troubled when he spoke to the man named Harris: "Do you want me to question this boy?" But he
could hear, and during those subsequent long seconds while there was absolutely no sound in the
crowded little room save that of quiet and intent breathing it was as if he had swung outward at the end of 
 
a grape vine, over a ravine, and at the top of the swing had been caught in a prolonged instant of
mesmerized gravity, weightless in time.
"No!" Harris said violently, explosively. "Damnation! Send him out of here!" Now time, the fluid world,
rushed beneath him again, the voices coming to him again through the smell of cheese and sealed meat,
the fear and despair and the old grief of blood:
"This case is closed. I can't find against you, Snopes, but I can give you advice. Leave this country and
don't come back to it."
His father spoke for the first time, his voice cold and harsh, level, without emphasis: "I aim to. I don't figure
to stay in a country among people who…" he said something unprintable and vile, addressed to no one.
"That'll do," the Justice said. "Take your wagon and get out of this country before dark. Case dismissed."
His father turned, and he followed the stiff black coat, the wiry figure walking a little stiffly from where a
Confederate provost's man's musket ball had taken him in the heel on a stolen horse thirty years ago,
followed the two backs now, since between the two lines of grim-faced men and out of the store and
across the worn gallery and down the sagging steps and among the dogs and half-grown boys in the mild
May dust, where as he passed a voice hissed:
"Barn burner!"
Again he could not see, whirling; there was a face in a red haze, moonlike, bigger than the full moon, the
owner of it half again his size, he leaping in the red haze toward the face, feeling no blow, feeling no
shock when his head struck the earth, scrabbling up and leaping again, feeling no blow this time either
and tasting no blood, scrabbling up to see the other boy in full flight and himself already leaping into
pursuit as his father's hand jerked him back, the harsh, cold voice speaking above him: "Go get in the
wagon."
It stood in a grove of locusts and mulberries across the road. His two hulking sisters in their Sunday
dresses and his mother and her sister in calico and sunbonnets were already in it, sitting on and among
the sorry residue of the dozen and more movings which even the boy could remember the battered stove,
the broken beds and chairs, the clock inlaid with mother-of-pearl, which would not run, stopped at some
fourteen minutes past two o'clock of a dead and forgotten day and time, which had been his mother's
dowry. She was crying, though when she saw him she drew her sleeve across her face and began to
descend from the wagon. "Get back," the father said.
"He's hurt. I got to get some water and wash his…"
His older brother had appeared from somewhere in the crowd, no taller than the father but thicker,
chewing tobacco steadily,
"Get back in the wagon," his father said. He got in too, over the tail-gate. His father mounted to the seat
where the older brother already sat and struck the gaunt mules two savage blows with the peeled willow,
but without heat. It was not even sadistic; it was exactly that same quality which in later years would
cause his descendants to over-run the engine before putting a motor car into motion, striking and reining
back in the same movement. The wagon went on, the store with its quiet crowd of grimly watching men
dropped behind; a curve in the road hid it. Forever he thought. Maybe he's done satisfied now, now that
he has ... stopping himself, not to say it aloud even to himself. His mother's hand touched his shoulder.
"Does hit hurt?" she said. 
 
"Naw," he said. "Hit don't hurt. Lemme be."
"Can't you wipe some of the blood off before hit dries?"
"I'll wash to-night," he said. "Lemme be, I tell you."
The wagon went on. He did not know where they were going. None of them ever did or ever asked,
because it was always somewhere, always a house of sorts waiting for them a day or two days or even
three days away. Likely his father had already arranged to make a crop on another farm before he...
Again he had to stop himself. He (the father) always did. There was something about his wolflike
independence and even courage when the advantage was at least neutral which impressed strangers, as
if they got from his latent ravening ferocity not so much a sense of dependability as a feeling that his
ferocious conviction in the rightness of his own actions would be of advantage to all whose interest lay
with his.
That night they camped in a grove of oaks and beeches where a spring ran. The nights were still cool and
they had a fire against it, of a rail lifted from a nearby fence and cut into lengths - a small fire, neat,
niggard almost, a shrewd fire; such fires were his father's habit and custom always, even in freezing
weather. Older, the boy might have remarked this and wondered why not a big one; why should not a
man who had not only seen the waste and extravagance of war, but who had in his blood an inherent
voracious prodigality with material not his own, have burned everything in sight? Then he might have
gone a step farther and thought that that was the reason: that niggard blaze was the living fruit of nights
passed during those four years in the woods hiding from all men, blue or gray, with his strings of horses
(captured horses, he called them). And older still, he might have divined the true reason: that the element
of fire spoke to some deep mainspring of his father's being, as the element of steel or of powder spoke to
other men, as the one weapon for the preservation of integrity, else breath were not worth the breathing,
and hence to be regarded with respect and used with discretion.
But he did not think this now and he had seen those same niggard blazes all his life. He merely ate his
supper beside it and was already half asleep over his iron plate when his father called him, and once
more he followed the stiff back, the stiff and ruthless limp, up the slope and on to the starlit road where,
turning, he could see his father against the stars but without face or depth-a shape black, flat, and
bloodless as though cut from tin in the iron folds of the frockcoat which had not been made for him, the
voice harsh like tin and without heat like tin:
"You were fixing to tell them. You would have told him." He didn't answer. His father struck him with the
flat of his hand on the side of the head, hard but without heat, exactly as he had struck the two mules at
the store, exactly as he would strike either of them with any stick in order to kill a horse fly, his voice still
without heat or anger: "You're getting to be a man. You got to learn. You got to learn to stick to your own
blood or you ain't going to have any blood to stick to you. Do you think either of them, any man there this
morning would? Don't you know all they wanted was a chance to get at me because they knew I had
them beat? Eh?" Later, twenty years later, he was to tell himself, "If I had said they wanted only truth,
justice, he would have hit me again." But now he said nothing. He was not crying. He just stood there.
"Answer me," his father said.
"Yes," he whispered. His father turned.
"Get on to bed. We'll be there to-morrow."
To-morrow they were there. In the early afternoon the wagon stopped before a paintless two-room house
identical almost with the dozen others it had stopped before even in the boy's ten years, and again, as on
the other dozen occasions, his mother and aunt got down and began to unload the wagon, although his
two sisters and his father and brother had not moved. 
 
"Likely hit ain't fitten for hawgs," one of the sisters said.
"Nevertheless, fit it will and you'll hog it and like it," his father said. "Get out of them chairs and help your
Ma unload."
The two sisters got down, big, bovine, in a flutter of cheap ribbons; one of them drew from the jumbled
wagon bed a battered lantern, the other a worn broom. His father handed the reins to the older son and
began to climb stiffly over the wheel. "When they get unloaded, take the team to the barn and feed them."
Then he said, and at first the boy thought he was still speaking to his brother: "Come with me."
"Me?" he said.
"Yes," his father said. "You."
"Abner," his mother said. His father paused and looked back - the harsh level stare beneath the shaggy,
graying, irascible brows.
"I reckon I'll have a word with the man that aims to begin to-morrow owning me body and soul for the next
eight months."
They went back up the road. A week ago - or before last night, that is - he would have asked where they
were going, but not now. His father had struck him before last night but never before had he paused
afterward to explain why; it was as if the blow and the following calm, outrageous voice still rang,
repercussed, divulging nothing to him save the terrible handicap of being young, the light weight of his
few years, just heavy enough to prevent his soaring free of the world as it seemed to be ordered but not
heavy enough to keep him footed solid in it, to resist it and try to change the course of its events.
Presently he could see the grove of oaks and cedars and the other flowering trees and shrubs where the
house would be, though not the house yet. They walked beside a fence massed with honeysuckle and
Cherokee roses and came to a gate swinging open between two brick pillars, and now, beyond a sweep
of drive, he saw the house for the first time and at that instant he forgot his father and the terror and
despair both, and even when he remembered his father again (who had not stopped) the terror and
despair did not return. Because, for all the twelve movings, they had sojourned until now in a poor
country, a land of small farms and fields and houses, and he had never seen a house like this before.
Hit's big as a courthouse he thought quietly, with a surge of peace and joy whose reason he could not
have thought into words, being too young for that: They are safe from him. People whose lives are a part
of this peace and dignity are beyond his touch, he no more to them than a buzzing wasp: capable of
stinging for a little moment but that's all; the spell of this peace and dignity rendering even the barns and
stable and cribs which belong to it impervious to the puny flames he might contrive ... this, the peace and
joy, ebbing for an instant as he looked again at the stiff black back, the stiff and implacable limp of the
figure which was not dwarfed by the house, for the reason that it had never looked big anywhere and
which now, against the serene columned backdrop, had more than ever that impervious quality of
something cut ruthlessly from tin, depthless, as though, sidewise to the sun, it would cast no shadow.
Watching him, the boy remarked the absolutely undeviating course which his father held and saw the stiff
foot come squarely down in a pile of fresh droppings where a horse had stood in the drive and which his
father could have avoided by a simple change of stride. But it ebbed only for a moment, though he could
not have thought this into words either, walking on in the spell of the house, which he could even want but
without envy, without sorrow, certainly never with that ravening and jealous rage which unknown to him
walked in the iron like black coat before him. Maybe he will feel it too. Maybe it will even change him now
from what maybe he couldn't help but be.
They crossed the portico. Now he could hear his father's stiff foot as it came down on the boards with
clocklike finality, a sound out of all proportion to the displacement of the body it bore and which was not
dwarfed either by the white door before it, as though it had attained to a sort of vicious and ravening 
 
minimum not to be dwarfed by anything - the flat, wide, black hat, the formal coat of broadcloth which had
once been black but which had now the friction-glazed greenish cast of the bodies of old house flies, the
lifted sleeve which was too large, the lifted hand like a curled claw. The door opened so promptly that the
boy knew the Negro must have been watching them all the time, an old man with neat grizzled hair, in a
linen jacket, who stood barring the door with his body, saying, "Wipe yo foots, white man, fo you come in
here. Major ain't home nohow."
"Get out of my way, nigger," his father said, without heat too, flinging the door back and the Negro also
and entering, his hat still on his head. And now the boy saw the prints of the stiff foot on the doorjamb and
saw them appear on the pale rug behind the machinelike deliberation of the foot which seemed to bear
(or transmit) twice the weight which the body compassed. The Negro was shouting "Miss Lula! Miss Lula!"
somewhere behind them, then the boy, deluged as though by a warm wave by a suave turn of carpeted
stair and a pendant glitter of chandeliers and a mute gleam of gold frames, heard the swift feet and saw
her too, a lady - perhaps he had never seen her like before either - in a gray, smooth gown with lace at
the throat and an apron tied at the waist and the sleeves turned back, wiping cake or biscuit dough from
her hands with a towel as she came up the hall, looking not at his father at all but at the tracks on the
blond rug with an expression of incredulous amazement.
"I tried," the Negro cried. "I tole him to…"
"Will you please go away?" she said in a shaking voice. "Major de Spain is not at home. Will you please
go away?"
His father had not spoken again. He did not speak again. He did not even look at her. He just stood stiff in
the center of the rug, in his hat, the shaggy iron-gray brows twitching slightly above the pebble-colored
eyes as he appeared to examine the house with brief deliberation. Then with the same deliberation he
turned; the boy watched him pivot on the good leg and saw the stiff foot drag round the arc of the turning,
leaving a final long and fading smear. His father never looked at it, he never once looked down at the rug.
The Negro held the door. It closed behind them, upon the hysteric and indistinguishable woman-wail. His
father stopped at the top of the steps and scraped his boot clean on the edge of it. At the gate he stopped
again. He stood for a moment, planted stiffly on the stiff foot, looking back at the house. "Pretty and white,
ain't it?" he said. "That's sweat. Nigger sweat. Maybe it ain't white enough yet to suit him. Maybe he
wants to mix some white sweat with it."
Two hours later the boy was chopping wood behind the house within which his mother and aunt and the
two sisters (the mother and aunt, not the two girls, he knew that; even at this distance and muffled by
walls the flat loud voices of the two girls emanated an incorrigible idle inertia) were setting up the stove to
prepare a meal, when he heard the hooves and saw the linen-clad man on a fine sorrel mare, whom he
recognized even before he saw the rolled rug in front of the Negro youth following on a fat bay carriage
horse - a suffused, angry face vanishing, still at full gallop, beyond the corner of the house where his
father and brother were sitting in the two tilted chairs; and a moment later, almost before he could have
put the axe down, he heard the hooves again and watched the sorrel mare go back out of the yard,
already galloping again.
Then his father began to shout one of the sisters' names, who presently emerged backward from the
kitchen door dragging the rolled rug along the ground by one end while the other sister walked behind it.
"If you ain't going to tote, go on and set up the wash pot," the first said.
"You, Sarty!" the second shouted, "Set up the wash pot!" His father appeared at the door, framed against
that shabbiness, as he had been against that other bland perfection, impervious to either, the mother's
anxious face at his shoulder. 
 
"Go on," the father said. "Pick it up." The two sisters stooped, broad, lethargic; stooping, they presented
an incredible expanse of pale cloth and a flutter of tawdry ribbons.
"If I thought enough of a rug to have to git hit all the way from France I wouldn't keep hit where folks
coming in would have to tromp on hit," the first said. They raised the rug.
"Abner," the mother said. "Let me do it."
"You go back and git dinner," his father said. "I'll tend to this."
From the woodpile through the rest of the afternoon the boy watched them, the rug spread flat in the dust
beside the bubbling wash-pot, the two sisters stooping over it with that profound and lethargic reluctance,
while the father stood over them in turn, implacable and grim, driving them though never raising his voice
again. He could smell the harsh homemade lye they were using; he saw his mother come to the door
once and look toward them with an expression not anxious now but very like despair; he saw his father
turn, and he fell to with the axe and saw from the corner of his eye his father raise from the ground a
flattish fragment of field stone and examine it and return to the pot, and this time his mother actually
spoke: "Abner. Abner. Please don't. Please, Abner."
Then he was done too. It was dusk; the whippoorwills had already begun. He could smell coffee from the
room where they would presently eat the cold food remaining from the mid-afternoon meal, though when
he entered the house he realized they were having coffee again probably because there was a fire on the
hearth, before which the rug now lay spread over the backs of the two chairs. The tracks of his father's
foot were gone. Where they had been were now long, water-cloudy scoriations resembling the sporadic
course of a lilliputian mowing machine.
It still hung there while they ate the cold food and then went to bed, scattered without order or claim up
and down the two rooms, his mother in one bed, where his father would later lie, the older brother in the
other, himself, the aunt, and the two sisters on pallets on the floor. But his father was not in bed yet. The
last thing the boy remembered was the depthless, harsh silhouette of the hat and coat bending over the
rug and it seemed to him that he had not even closed his eyes when the silhouette was standing over
him, the fire almost dead behind it, the stiff foot prodding him awake. "Catch up the mule," his father said.
When he returned with the mule his father was standing in the black door, the rolled rug over his
shoulder. "Ain't you going to ride?" he said.
"No. Give me your foot."
He bent his knee into his father's hand, the wiry, surprising power flowed smoothly, rising, he rising with it,
on to the mule's bare back (they had owned a saddle once; the boy could remember it though not when
or where) and with the same effortlessness his father swung the rug up in front of him. Now in the
starlight they retraced the afternoon's path, up the dusty road rife with honeysuckle, through the gate and
up the black tunnel of the drive to the lightless house, where he sat on the mule and felt the rough warp of
the rug drag across his thighs and vanish.
"Don't you want me to help?" he whispered. His father did not answer and now he heard again that stiff
foot striking the hollow portico with that wooden and clocklike deliberation, that outrageous overstatement
of the weight it carried. The rug, hunched, not flung (the boy could tell that even in the darkness) from his
father's shoulder struck the angle of wall and floor with a sound unbelievably loud, thunderous, then the
foot again, unhurried and enormous; a light came on in the house and the boy sat, tense, breathing
steadily and quietly and just a little fast, though the foot itself did not increase its beat at all, descending
the steps now; now the boy could see him. 
 
"Don't you want to ride now?" he whispered. "We kin both ride now," the light within the house altering
now, flaring up and sinking, He's coming down the stairs now, he thought. He had already ridden the mule
up beside the horse block; presently his father was up behind him and he doubled the reins over and
slashed the mule across the neck, but before the animal could begin to trot the hard, thin arm came round
him, the hard, knotted hand jerking the mule back to a walk.
In the first red rays of the sun they were in the lot, putting plow gear on the mules. This time the sorrel
mare was in the lot before he heard it at all, the rider collarless and even bareheaded, trembling,
speaking in a shaking voice as the woman in the house had done, his father merely looking up once
before stooping again to the hame he was buckling, so that the man on the mare spoke to his stooping
back:
"You must realize you have ruined that rug. Wasn't there anybody here, any of your women…" he
ceased, shaking, the boy watching him, the older brother leaning now in the stable door, chewing,
blinking slowly and steadily at nothing apparently. "It cost a hundred dollars. But you never had a hundred
dollars. You never will. So I'm going to charge you twenty bushels of corn against your crop. I'll add it in
your contract and when you come to the commissary you can sign it. That won't keep Mrs. de Spain quiet
but maybe it will teach you to wipe your feet off before you enter her house again."
Then he was gone. The boy looked at his father, who still had not spoken or even looked up again, who
was now adjusting the logger-head in the hame.
"Pap," he said. His father looked at him - the inscrutable face, the shaggy brows beneath which the gray
eyes glinted coldly. Suddenly the boy went toward him, fast, stopping as suddenly. "You done the best
you could!" he cried. "If he wanted hit done different why didn't he wait and tell you how? He won't git no
twenty bushels! He won't git none! We'll gether hit and hide hit! I kin watch…"
"Did you put the cutter back in that straight stock like I told you?"
"No sir," he said.
"Then go do it."
That was Wednesday. During the rest of that week he worked steadily, at what was within his scope and
some which was beyond it, with an industry that did not need to be driven nor even commanded twice; he
had this from his mother, with the difference that some at least of what he did he liked to do, such as
splitting wood with the half-size axe which his mother and aunt had earned, or saved money somehow, to
present him with at Christmas. In company with the two older women (and on one afternoon, even one of
the sisters), he built pens for the shoat and the cow which were a part of his father's contract with the
landlord, and one afternoon, his father being absent, gone somewhere on one of the mules, he went to
the field,
They were running a middle buster now, his brother holding the plow straight while he handled the reins,
and walking beside the straining mule, the rich black soil shearing cool and damp against his bare ankles,
he thought Maybe this is the end of it. Maybe even that twenty bushels that seems hard to have to pay for
just a rug will be a cheap price for him to stop forever and always from being what he used to be; thinking,
dreaming now, so that his brother had to speak sharply to him to mind the mule: Maybe he even won't
collect the twenty bushels. Maybe it will all add up and balance and vanish - corn, rug, fire; the terror and
grief, the being pulled two ways like between two teams of horses - gone, done with for ever and ever.
Then it was Saturday; he looked up from beneath the mule he was harnessing and saw his father in the
black coat and hat. "Not that," his father said. "The wagon gear." And then, two hours later, sitting in the
wagon bed behind his father and brother on the seat, the wagon accomplished a final curve, and he saw
the weathered paintless store with its tattered tobacco and patent-medicine posters and the tethered 
 
wagons and saddle animals below the gallery. He mounted the gnawed steps behind his father and
brother, and there again was the lane of quiet, watching faces for the three of them to walk through. He
saw the man in spectacles sitting at the plank table and he did not need to be told this was a Justice of
the Peace; he sent one glare of fierce, exultant, partisan defiance at the man in collar and cravat now,
whom he had seen but twice before in his life, and that on a galloping horse, who now wore on his face
an expression not of rage but of amazed unbelief which the boy could not have known was at the
incredible circumstance of being sued by one of his own tenants, and came and stood against his father
and cried at the justice: "He ain't done it! He ain't burnt…"
"Go back to the wagon," his father said.
"Burnt?" the Justice said. "Do I understand this rug was burned too?"
"Does anybody here claim it was?" his father said. "Go back to the wagon." But he did not, he merely
retreated to the rear of the room, crowded as that other had been, but not to sit down this time, instead, to
stand pressing among the motionless bodies, listening to the voices:
"And you claim twenty bushels of corn is too high for the damage you did to the rug?"
"He brought the rug to me and said he wanted the tracks washed out of it. I washed the tracks out and
took the rug back to him."
"But you didn't carry the rug back to him in the same condition it was in before you made the tracks on it."
His father did not answer, and now for perhaps half a minute there was no sound at all save that of
breathing, the faint, steady suspiration of complete and intent listening.
"You decline to answer that, Mr. Snopes?" Again his father did not answer. "I'm going to find against you,
Mr. Snopes, I'm going to find that you were responsible for the injury to Major de Spain's rug and hold you
liable for it. But twenty bushels of corn seems a little high for a man in your circumstances to have to pay.
Major de Spain claims it cost a hundred dollars. October corn will be worth about fifty cents. I figure that if
Major de Spain can stand a ninety-five dollar loss on something he paid cash for, you can stand a fivedollar loss you haven't earned yet. I hold you in damages to Major de Spain to the amount of ten bushels
of corn over and above your contract with him, to be paid to him out of your crop at gathering time. Court
adjourned."
It had taken no time hardly, the morning was but half begun. He thought they would return home and
perhaps back to the field, since they were late, far behind all other farmers. But instead his father passed
on behind the wagon, merely indicating with his hand for the older brother to follow with it, and he crossed
the road toward the blacksmith shop opposite, pressing on after his father, overtaking him, speaking,
whispering up at the harsh, calm face beneath the weathered hat: "He won't git no ten bushels neither. He
won't git one. We'll…" until his father glanced for an instant down at him, the face absolutely calm, the
grizzled eyebrows tangled above the cold eyes, the voice almost pleasant, almost gentle:
"You think so? Well, we'll wait till October anyway."
The matter of the wagon - the setting of a spoke or two and the tightening of the tires - did not take long
either, the business of the tires accomplished by driving the wagon into the spring branch behind the shop
and letting it stand there, the mules nuzzling into the water from time to time, and the boy on the seat with
the idle reins, looking up the slope and through the sooty tunnel of the shed where the slow hammer rang
and where his father sat on an upended cypress bolt, easily, either talking or listening, still sitting there
when the boy brought the dripping wagon up out of the branch and halted it before the door. 
 
"Take them on to the shade and hitch," his father said. He did so and returned. His father and the smith
and a third man squatting on his heels inside the door were talking, about crops and animals; the boy,
squatting too in the ammoniac dust and hoof-parings and scales of rust, heard his father tell a long and
unhurried story out of the time before the birth of the older brother even when he had been a professional
horse trader. And then his father came up beside him where he stood before a tattered last year's circus
poster on the other side of the store, gazing rapt and quiet at the scarlet horses, the incredible poisings
and convolutions of tulle and tights and the painted leer of comedians, and said, "It's time to eat."
But not at home. Squatting beside his brother against the front wall, he watched his father emerge from
the store and produce from a paper sack a segment of cheese and divide it carefully and deliberately into
three with his pocket knife and produce crackers from the same sack. They all three squatted on the
gallery and ate, slowly, without talking; then in the store again, they drank from a tin dipper tepid water
smelling of the cedar bucket and of living beech trees. And still they did not go home. It was a horse lot
this time, a tall rail fence upon and along which men stood and sat and out of which one by one horses
were led, to be walked and trotted and then cantered back and forth along the road while the slow
swapping and buying went on and the sun began to slant westward, they - the three of them - watching
and listening, the older brother with his muddy eyes and his steady, inevitable tobacco, the father
commenting now and then on certain of the animals, to no one in particular.
It was after sundown when they reached home. They ate supper by lamplight, then, sitting on the
doorstep, the boy watched the night fully accomplished, listening to the whippoorwills and the frogs, when
he heard his mother's voice: "Abner! No! No! Oh, God. Oh, God. Abner!" and he rose, whirled, and saw
the altered light through the door where a candle stub now burned in a bottle neck on the table and his
father, still in the hat and coat, at once formal and burlesque as though dressed carefully for some shabby
and ceremonial violence, emptying the reservoir of the lamp back into the five-gallon kerosene can from
which it had been filled, while the mother tugged at his arm until he shifted the lamp to the other hand and
flung her back, not savagely or viciously, just hard, into the wall, her hands flung out against the wall for
balance, her mouth open and in her face the same quality of hopeless despair as had been in her voice.
Then his father saw him standing in the door.
"Go to the barn and get that can of oil we were oiling the wagon with," he said. The boy did not move.
Then he could speak.
"What…" he cried "What are you…"
"Go get that oil," his father said. "Go."
Then he was moving, running outside the house, toward the stable: this the old habit, the old blood which
he had not been permitted to choose for himself, which had been bequeathed him willy nilly and which
had run for so long (and who knew where, battening on what of outrage and savagery and lust) before it
came to him. I could keep on, he thought. I could run on and on and never look back, never need to see
his face again. Only I can't. I can't, the rusted can in his hand now, the liquid sploshing in it as he ran back
to the house and into it, into the sound of his mother's weeping in the next room, and handed the can to
his father.
"Ain't you going to even send a nigger?" he cried. "At least you sent a nigger before!"
This time his father didn't strike him. The hand came even faster than the blow had, the same hand which
had set the can on the table with almost excruciating care flashing from the can toward him too quick for
him to follow it, gripping him by the back of the shirt and on to tiptoe before he had seen it quit the can,
the face stooping at him in breathless and frozen ferocity, the cold, dead voice speaking over him to the
older brother who leaned against the table, chewing with that steady, curious, sidewise motion of cows:
"Empty the can into the big one and go on. I'll ketch up with you." 
 
"Better tie him to the bedpost," the brother said.
"Do like I told you," the father said. Then the boy was moving, his bunched shirt and the hard, bony hand
between his shoulder-blades, his toes just touching the floor, across the room and into the other one, past
the sisters sitting with spread heavy thighs in the two chairs over the cold hearth, and to where his mother
and aunt sat side by side on the bed, the aunt's arms about his mother's shoulders.
"Hold him," the father said. The aunt made a startled movement. "Not you," the father said. "Lennie. Take
hold of him. I want to see you do it." His mother took him by the wrist. "You'll hold him better than that. If
he gets loose don't you know what he is going to do? He will go up yonder." He jerked his head toward
the road. "Maybe I'd better tie him."
"I'll hold him," his mother whispered.
"See you do then." Then his father was gone, the stiff foot heavy and measured upon the boards, ceasing
at last.
Then he began to struggle. His mother caught him in both arms, he jerking and wrenching at them. He
would be stronger in the end, he knew that. But he had no time to wait for it. "Lemme go!" he cried. "I
don't want to have to hit you!"
"Let him go!" the aunt said. "If he don't go, before God, I am going up there myself!"
"Don't you see I can't?" his mother cried. "Sarty! Sarty! No! No! Help me, Lizzie!"
Then he was free. His aunt grasped at him but was too late. He whirled, running, his mother stumbled
forward on to her knees behind him, crying to the nearer sister: "Catch him, Net! Catch him!" But that was
too late too, the sister (the sisters were twins, born at the same time, yet either of them now gave the
impression of being, encompassing as much living meat and volume and weight as any other two of the
family) not yet having begun to rise from the chair, her head, face, alone merely turned, presenting to him
in the flying instant an astonishing expanse of young female features untroubled by any surprise even,
wearing only an expression of bovine interest. Then he was out of the room, out of the house, in the mild
dust of the starlit road and the heavy rifeness of honeysuckle, the pale ribbon unspooling with terrific
slowness under his running feet, reaching the gate at last and turning in, running, his heart and lungs
drumming, on up the drive toward the lighted house, the lighted door. He did not knock, he burst in,
sobbing for breath, incapable for the moment of speech; he saw the astonished face of the Negro in the
linen jacket without knowing when the Negro had appeared.
"De Spain!" he cried, panted. "Where's…" then he saw the white man too emerging from a white door
down the hall. "Barn!" he cried. "Barn!"
"What?" the white man said. "Barn?"
"Yes!" the boy cried. "Barn!"
"Catch him!" the white man shouted.
But it was too late this time too. The Negro grasped his shirt, but the entire sleeve, rotten with washing,
carried away, and he was out that door too and in the drive again, and had actually never ceased to run
even while he was screaming into the white man's face.
Behind him the white man was shouting, "My horse! Fetch my horse!" and he thought for an instant of
cutting across the park and climbing the fence into the road, but he did not know the park nor how high 
 
the vine-massed fence might be and he dared not risk it. So he ran on down the drive, blood and breath
roaring; presently he was in the road again though he could not see it. He could not hear either: the
galloping mare was almost upon him before he heard her, and even then he held his course, as if the
urgency of his wild grief and need must in a moment more find him wings, waiting until the ultimate instant
to hurl himself aside and into the weed-choked roadside ditch as the horse thundered past and on, for an
instant in furious silhouette against the stars, the tranquil early summer night sky which, even before the
shape of the horse and rider vanished, strained abruptly and violently upward: a long, swirling roar
incredible and soundless, blotting the stars, and he springing up and into the road again, running again,
knowing it was too late yet still running even after he heard the shot and, an instant later, two shots,
pausing now without knowing he had ceased to run, crying "Pap! Pap!," running again before he knew he
had begun to run, stumbling, tripping over something and scrabbling up again without ceasing to run,
looking backward over his shoulder at the glare as he got up, running on among the invisible trees,
panting, sobbing, "Father! Father!"
At midnight he was sitting on the crest of a hill. He did not know it was midnight and he did not know how
far he had come. But there was no glare behind him now and he sat now, his back toward what he had
called home for four days anyhow, his face toward the dark woods which he would enter when breath
was strong again, small, shaking steadily in the chill darkness, hugging himself into the remainder of his
thin, rotten shirt, the grief and despair now no longer terror and fear but just grief and despair. Father. My
father, he thought. "He was brave!" he cried suddenly, aloud but not loud, no more than a whisper: "He
was! He was in the war! He was in Colonel Sartoris' cav'ry!" not knowing that his father had gone to that
war a private in the fine old European sense, wearing no uniform, admitting the authority of and giving
fidelity to no man or army or flag, going to war as Malbrouck himself did: for booty - it meant nothing and
less than nothing to him if it were enemy booty or his own.
The slow constellations wheeled on. It would be dawn and then sun-up after a while and he would be
hungry. But that would be to-morrow and now he was only cold, and walking would cure that. His
breathing was easier now and he decided to get up and go on, and then he found that he had been
asleep because he knew it was almost dawn, the night almost over. He could tell that from the
whippoorwills. They were everywhere now among the dark trees below him, constant and inflectioned
and ceaseless, so that, as the instant for giving over to the day birds drew nearer and nearer, there was
no interval at all between them. He got up. He was a little stiff, but walking would cure that too as it would
the cold, and soon there would be the sun. He went on down the hill, toward the dark woods within which
the liquid silver voices of the birds called unceasing - the rapid and urgent beating of the urgent and
quiring heart of the late spring night. He did not look back. 