After dark on Saturday night one could stand on the first tee
of the golf-course and see the country-club windows as a
yellow expanse over a very black and wavy ocean. The
waves of this ocean, so to speak, were the heads of many
curious caddies, a few of the more ingenious chauffeurs, the
golf professional's deaf sister--and there were usually several
stray, diffident waves who might have rolled inside had they
so desired. This was the gallery.
The balcony was inside. It consisted of the circle of wicker
chairs that lined the wall of the combination clubroom and
ballroom. At these Saturday-night dances it was largely
feminine; a great babel of middle-aged ladies with sharp eyes
and icy hearts behind lorgnettes and large bosoms. The main
function of the balcony was critical. It occasionally showed
grudging admiration, but never approval, for it is well known
among ladies over thirty-five that when the younger set
dance in the summer-time it is with the very worst intentions
in the world, and if they are not bombarded with stony eyes
stray couples will dance weird barbaric interludes in the
corners, and the more popular, more dangerous, girls will
sometimes be kissed in the parked limousines of
unsuspecting dowagers.
But, after all, this critical circle is not close enough to the
stage to see the actors' faces and catch the subtler byplay. It
can only frown and lean, ask questions and make
satisfactory deductions from its set of postulates, such as the
one which states that every young man with a large income
leads the life of a hunted partridge. It never really appreciates
the drama of the shifting, semicruel world of adolescence.
No; boxes, orchestra-circle, principals, and chorus are
represented by the medley of faces and voices that sway to
the plaintive African rhythm of Dyer's dance orchestra.
From sixteen-year-old Otis Ormonde, who has two more
years at Hill School, to G. Reece Stoddard, over whose
bureau at home hangs a Harvard law diploma; from little
Madeleine Hogue, whose hair still feels strange and
uncomfortable on top of her head, to Bessie MacRae, who
has been the life of the party a little too long--more than ten
years--the medley is not only the centre of the stage but
contains the only people capable of getting an un-obstructed
view of it.
With a flourish and a bang the music stops. The couples
exchange artificial, effortless smiles, facetiously repeat "lade-da-da dum-dum," and then the clatter of young feminine
voices soars over the burst of clapping.
A few disappointed stags caught in midfloor as they had
been about to cut in subsided listlessly back to the walls,
because this was not like the riotous Christmas dances--
these summer hops were considered just pleasantly warm
and exciting, where even the younger marrieds rose and
performed ancient waltzes and terrifying fox trots to the
tolerant amusement of their younger brothers and sisters.
Warren McIntyre, who casually attended Yale, being one of
the unfortunate stags, felt in his dinner-coat pocket for a
cigarette and strolled out onto the wide, semidark veranda,
where couples were scattered at tables, filling the lanternhung night with vague words and hazy laughter. He nodded
here and there at the less absorbed and as he passed each
couple some half-forgotten fragment of a story played in his
mind, for it was not a large city and every one was Who's
Who to every one else's past. There, for example, were Jim
Strain and Ethel Demorest, who had been privately engaged
for three years. Every one knew that as soon as Jim
managed to hold a job for more than two months she would
marry him. Yet how bored they both looked, and how wearily
Ethel regarded Jim sometimes, as if she wondered why she
had trained the vines of her affection on such a wind-shaken
poplar.
Warren was nineteen and rather pitying with those of his
friends who hadn't gone East to college. But, like most boys,
he bragged tremendously about the girls of his city when he
was away from it. There was Genevieve Ormonde, who
regularly made the rounds of dances, house-parties, and
football games at Princeton, Yale, Williams, and Cornell;
there was black-eyed Roberta Dillon, who was quite as
famous to her own generation as Hiram Johnson or Ty Cobb;
and, of course, there was Marjorie Harvey, who besides
having a fairylike face and a dazzling, bewildering tongue
was already justly celebrated for having turned five cartwheels in succession during the last pump-and-slipper dance
at New Haven.
Warren, who had grown up across the street from Marjorie,
had long been "crazy about her." Sometimes she seemed to
reciprocate his feeling with a faint gratitude, but she had tried
him by her infallible test and informed him gravely that she
did not love him. Her test was that when she was away from
him she forgot him and had affairs with other boys. Warren
found this discouraging, especially as Marjorie had been
making little trips all summer, and for the first two or three
days after each arrival home he saw great heaps of mail on
the Harveys' hall table addressed to her in various masculine
handwritings. To make matters worse, all during the month of
August she had been visited by her cousin Bernice from Eau
Claire, and it seemed impossible to see her alone. It was
always necessary to hunt round and find some one to take
care of Bernice. As August waned this was becoming more
and more difficult.
Much as Warren worshipped Marjorie, he had to admit that
Cousin Bernice was sorta dopeless. She was pretty, with
dark hair and high color, but she was no fun on a party.
Every Saturday night he danced a long arduous duty dance
with her to please Marjorie, but he had never been anything
but bored in her company.
"Warren"--a soft voice at his elbow broke in upon his
thoughts, and he turned to see Marjorie, flushed and radiant
as usual. She laid a hand on his shoulder and a glow settled
almost imperceptibly over him.
"Warren," she whispered, "do something for me--dance with
Bernice. She's been stuck with little Otis Ormonde for almost
an hour."
Warren's glow faded. 

"Why--sure," he answered half-heartedly.
"You don't mind, do you? I'll see that you don't get stuck."
"'Sall right."
Marjorie smiled--that smile that was thanks enough.
"You're an angel, and I'm obliged loads."
With a sigh the angel glanced round the veranda, but Bernice
and Otis were not in sight. He wandered back inside, and
there in front of the women's dressing-room he found Otis in
the centre of a group of young men who were convulsed with
laughter. Otis was brandishing a piece of timber he had
picked up, and discoursing volubly.
"She's gone in to fix her hair," he announced wildly. "I'm
waiting to dance another hour with her."
Their laughter was renewed.
"Why don't some of you cut in?" cried Otis resentfully. "She
likes more variety."
"Why, Otis," suggested a friend, "you've just barely got used
to her."
"Why the two-by-four, Otis?" inquired Warren, smiling.
"The two-by-four? Oh, this? This is a club. When she comes
out I'll hit her on the head and knock her in again."
Warren collapsed on a settee and howled with glee.
"Never mind, Otis," he articulated finally. "I'm relieving you
this time."
Otis simulated a sudden fainting attack and handed the stick
to Warren.
"If you need it, old man," he said hoarsely.
No matter how beautiful or brilliant a girl may be, the
reputation of not being frequently cut in on makes her
position at a dance unfortunate. Perhaps boys prefer her
company to that of the butterflies with whom they dance a
dozen times an evening, but youth in this jazz-nourished
generation is temperamentally restless, and the idea of foxtrotting more than one full fox trot with the same girl is
distasteful, not to say odious. When it comes to several
dances and the intermissions between she can be quite sure
that a young man, once relieved, will never tread on her
wayward toes again.
Warren danced the next full dance with Bernice, and finally,
thankful for the intermission, he led her to a table on the
veranda. There was a moment's silence while she did
unimpressive things with her fan.
"It's hotter here than in Eau Claire," she said.
Warren stifled a sigh and nodded. It might be for all he knew
or cared. He wondered idly whether she was a poor
conversationalist because she got no attention or got no
attention because she was a poor conversationalist.
"You going to be here much longer?" he asked, and then
turned rather red. She might suspect his reasons for asking.
"Another week," she answered, and stared at him as if to
lunge at his next remark when it left his lips.
Warren fidgeted. Then with a sudden charitable impulse he
decided to try part of his line on her. He turned and looked at
her eyes.
"You've got an awfully kissable mouth," he began quietly.
This was a remark that he sometimes made to girls at college
proms when they were talking in just such half dark as this.
Bernice distinctly jumped. She turned an ungraceful red and
became clumsy with her fan. No one had ever made such a
remark to her before.
"Fresh!"--the word had slipped out before she realized it, and
she bit her lip. Too late she decided to be amused, and
offered him a flustered smile.
Warren was annoyed. Though not accustomed to have that
remark taken seriously, still it usually provoked a laugh or a
paragraph of sentimental banter. And he hated to be called
fresh, except in a joking way. His charitable impulse died and
he switched the topic.
"Jim Strain and Ethel Demorest sitting out as usual," he
commented.
This was more in Bernice's line, but a faint regret mingled
with her relief as the subject changed. Men did not talk to her
about kissable mouths, but she knew that they talked in
some such way to other girls.
"Oh, yes," she said, and laughed. "I hear they've been
mooning round for years without a red penny.
Isn't it silly?"
Warren's disgust increased. Jim Strain was a close friend of
his brother's, and anyway he considered it bad form to sneer
at people for not having money. But Bernice had had no
intention of sneering. She was merely nervous.
II
When Marjorie and Bernice reached home at half after
midnight they said good night at the top of the stairs. Though
cousins, they were not intimates. As a matter of fact Marjorie
had no female intimates--she considered girls stupid. Bernice
on the contrary all through this parent-arranged visit had
rather longed to exchange those confidences flavored with
giggles and tears that she considered an indispensable factor 

in all feminine intercourse. But in this respect she found
Marjorie rather cold; felt somehow the same difficulty in
talking to her that she had in talking to men. Marjorie never
giggled, was never frightened, seldom embarrassed, and in
fact had very few of the qualities which Bernice considered
appropriately and blessedly feminine.
As Bernice busied herself with tooth-brush and paste this
night she wondered for the hundredth time why she never
had any attention when she was away from home. That her
family were the wealthiest in Eau Claire; that her mother
entertained tremendously, gave little dinners for her daughter
before all dances and bought her a car of her own to drive
round in, never occurred to her as factors in her home-town
social success. Like most girls she had been brought up on
the warm milk prepared by Annie Fellows Johnston and on
novels in which the female was beloved because of certain
mysterious womanly qualities. always mentioned but never
displayed.
Bernice felt a vague pain that she was not at present
engaged in being popular. She did not know that had it not
been for Marjorie's campaigning she would have danced the
entire evening with one man; but she knew that even in Eau
Claire other girls with less position and less pulchritude were
given a much bigger rush. She attributed this to something
subtly unscrupulous in those girls. It had never worried her,
and if it had her mother would have assured her that the
other girls cheapened themselves and that men really
respected girls like Bernice.
She turned out the light in her bathroom, and on an impulse
decided to go in and chat for a moment with her aunt
Josephine, whose light was still on. Her soft slippers bore her
noiselessly down the carpeted hall, but hearing voices inside
she stopped near the partly opened door. Then she caught
her own name, and without any definite intention of
eavesdropping lingered--and the thread of the conversation
going on inside pierced her consciousness sharply as if it had
been drawn through with a needle.
"She's absolutely hopeless!" It was Marjorie's voice. "Oh, I
know what you're going to say! So many people have told
you how pretty and sweet she is, and how she can cook!
What of it? She has a bum time. Men don't like her."
"What's a little cheap popularity?"
Mrs. Harvey sounded annoyed.
"It's everything when you're eighteen," said Marjorie
emphatically. "I've done my best. I've been polite and I've
made men dance with her, but they just won't stand being
bored. When I think of that gorgeous coloring wasted on such
a ninny, and think what Martha Carey could do with it--oh!"
"There's no courtesy these days."
Mrs. Harvey's voice implied that modern situations were too
much for her. When she was a girl all young ladies who
belonged to nice families had glorious times.
"Well," said Marjorie, "no girl can permanently bolster up a
lame-duck visitor, because these days it's every girl for
herself. I've even tried to drop her hints about clothes and
things, and she's been furious--given me the funniest looks.
She's sensitive enough to know she's not getting away with
much, but I'll bet she consoles herself by thinking that she's
very virtuous and that I'm too gay and fickle and will come to
a bad end. All unpopular girls think that way. Sour grapes!
Sarah Hopkins refers to Genevieve and Roberta and me as
gardenia girls! I'll bet she'd give ten years of her life and her
European education to be a gardenia girl and have three or
four men in love with her and be cut in on every few feet at
dances."
"It seems to me," interrupted Mrs. Harvey rather wearily, "that
you ought to be able to do something for Bernice. I know
she's not very vivacious."
Marjorie groaned.
"Vivacious! Good grief! I've never heard her say anything to a
boy except that it's hot or the floor's crowded or that she's
going to school in New York next year. Sometimes she asks
them what kind of car they have and tells them the kind she
has. Thrilling!"
There was a short silence, and then Mrs. Harvey took up her
refrain:
"All I know is that other girls not half so sweet and attractive
get partners. Martha Carey, for instance, is stout and loud,
and her mother is distinctly common. Roberta Dillon is so thin
this year that she looks as though Arizona were the place for
her. She's dancing herself to death."
"But, mother," objected Marjorie impatiently, "Martha is
cheerful and awfully witty and an awfully slick girl, and
Roberta's a marvellous dancer. She's been popular for ages!"
Mrs. Harvey yawned.
"I think it's that crazy Indian blood in Bernice," continued
Marjorie. "Maybe she's a reversion to type. Indian women all
just sat round and never said anything."
"Go to bed, you silly child," laughed Mrs. Harvey. "I wouldn't
have told you that if I'd thought you were going to remember
it. And I think most of your ideas are perfectly idiotic," she
finished sleepily.
There was another silence, while Marjorie considered
whether or not convincing her mother was worth the trouble.
People over forty can seldom be permanently convinced of
anything. At eighteen our convictions are hills from which we
look; at forty-five they are caves in which we hide.
Having decided this, Marjorie said good night. When she
came out into the hall it was quite empty.
III 

While Marjorie was breakfasting late next day Bernice came
into the room with a rather formal good morning, sat down
opposite, stared intently over and slightly moistened her lips.
"What's on your mind?" inquired Marjorie, rather puzzled.
Bernice paused before she threw her hand-grenade.
"I heard what you said about me to your mother last night."
Marjorie was startled, but she showed only a faintly
heightened color and her voice was quite even when she
spoke.
"Where were you?"
"In the hall. I didn't mean to listen--at first."
After an involuntary look of contempt Marjorie dropped her
eyes and became very interested in balancing a stray cornflake on her finger.
"I guess I'd better go back to Eau Claire--if I'm such a
nuisance." Bernice's lower lip was trembling violently and she
continued on a wavering note: "I've tried to be nice, and--and
I've been first neglected and then insulted. No one ever
visited me and got such treatment."
Marjorie was silent.
"But I'm in the way, I see. I'm a drag on you. Your friends
don't like me." She paused, and then remembered another
one of her grievances. "Of course I was furious last week
when you tried to hint to me that that dress was unbecoming.
Don't you think I know how to dress myself?"
"No," murmured Marjorie less than half-aloud.
"What?"
"I didn't hint anything," said Marjorie succinctly. "I said, as I
remember, that it was better to wear a becoming dress three
times straight than to alternate it with two frights."
"Do you think that was a very nice thing to say?"
"I wasn't trying to be nice." Then after a pause: "When do you
want to go?"
Bernice drew in her breath sharply.
"Oh!" It was a little half-cry.
Marjorie looked up in surprise.
"Didn't you say you were going?"
"Yes, but----"
"Oh, you were only bluffing!"
They stared at each other across the breakfast-table for a
moment. Misty waves were passing before Bernice's eyes,
while Marjorie's face wore that rather hard expression that
she used when slightly intoxicated undergraduates were
making love to her.
"So you were bluffing," she repeated as if it were what she
might have expected.
Bernice admitted it by bursting into tears. Marjorie's eyes
showed boredom.
"You're my cousin," sobbed Bernice. "I'm v-v-visiting you. I
was to stay a month, and if I go home my mother will know
and she'll wah-wonder----"
Marjorie waited until the shower of broken words collapsed
into little sniffles.
"I'll give you my month's allowance," she said coldly, "and
you can spend this last week anywhere you want. There's a
very nice hotel----"
Bernice's sobs rose to a flute note, and rising of a sudden
she fled from the room.
An hour later, while Marjorie was in the library absorbed in
composing one of those non-committal, marvellously elusive
letters that only a young girl can write, Bernice reappeared,
very red-eyed and consciously calm. She cast no glance at
Marjorie but took a book at random from the shelf and sat
down as if to read. Marjorie seemed absorbed in her letter
and continued writing. When the clock showed noon Bernice
closed her book with a snap.
"I suppose I'd better get my railroad ticket."
This was not the beginning of the speech she had rehearsed
up-stairs, but as Marjorie was not getting her cues--wasn't
urging her to be reasonable; it's all a mistake--it was the best
opening she could muster.
"Just wait till I finish this letter," said Marjorie without looking
round. "I want to get it off in the next mail."
After another minute, during which her pen scratched busily,
she turned round and relaxed with an air of "at your service."
Again Bernice had to speak.
"Do you want me to go home?"
"Well," said Marjorie, considering, "I suppose if you're not
having a good time you'd better go. No use being miserable."
"Don't you think common kindness----"
"Oh, please don't quote `Little Women'!" cried Marjorie
impatiently. "That's out of style."
"You think so?" 

"Heavens, yes! What modern girl could live like those inane
females?"
"They were the models for our mothers."
Marjorie laughed.
"Yes, they were--not! Besides, our mothers were all very well
in their way, but they know very little about their daughters'
problems."
Bernice drew herself up.
"Please don't talk about my mother."
Marjorie laughed.
"I don't think I mentioned her."
Bernice felt that she was being led away from her subject.
"Do you think you've treated me very well?"
"I've done my best. You're rather hard material to work with."
The lids of Bernice's eyes reddened.
"I think you're hard and selfish, and you haven't a feminine
quality in you."
"Oh, my Lord!" cried Marjorie in desperation. "You little nut!
Girls like you are responsible for all the tiresome colorless
marriages; all those ghastly inefficiencies that pass as
feminine qualities. What a blow it must be when a man with
imagination marries the beautiful bundle of clothes that he's
been building ideals round, and finds that she's just a weak,
whining, cowardly mass of affectations!"
Bernice's mouth had slipped half open.
"The womanly woman!" continued Marjorie. "Her whole early
life is occupied in whining criticisms of girls like me who really
do have a good time."
Bernice's jaw descended farther as Marjorie's voice rose.
"There's some excuse for an ugly girl whining. If I'd been
irretrievably ugly I'd never have forgiven my parents for
bringing me into the world. But you're starting life without any
handicap--" Marjorie's little fist clinched. "If you expect me to
weep with you you'll be disappointed. Go or stay, just as you
like." And picking up her letters she left the room.
Bernice claimed a headache and failed to appear at
luncheon. They had a matinée date for the afternoon, but the
headache persisting, Marjorie made explanation to a not very
downcast boy. But when she returned late in the afternoon
she found Bernice with a strangely set face waiting for her in
her bedroom.
"I've decided," began Bernice without preliminaries, "that
maybe you're right about things--possibly not. But if you'll tell
me why your friends aren't--aren't interested in me I'll see if I
can do what you want me to."
Marjorie was at the mirror shaking down her hair.
"Do you mean it?"
"Yes."
"Without reservations? Will you do exactly what I say?"
"Well, I----"
"Well nothing! Will you do exactly as I say?"
"If they're sensible things."
"They're not! You're no case for sensible things."
" Are you going to make--to recommend----"
"Yes, everything. If I tell you to take boxinglessons you'll have to do it. Write home and tell your mother
you're going to stay another two weeks."
"If you'll tell me----"
"All right--I'll just give you a few examples now. First, you
have no ease of manner. Why? Because you're never sure
about your personal appearance. When a girl feels that she's
perfectly groomed and dressed she can forget that part of
her. That's charm. The more parts of yourself you can afford
to forget the more charm you have."
"Don't I look all right?"
"No; for instance, you never take care of your eyebrows.
They're black and lustrous, but by leaving them straggly
they're a blemish. They'd be beautiful if you'd take care of
them in one-tenth the time you take doing nothing. You're
going to brush them so that they'll grow straight."
Bernice raised the brows in question.
"Do you mean to say that men notice eyebrows?"
"Yes--subconsciously. And when you go home you ought to
have your teeth straightened a little. It's almost imperceptible,
still----"
"But I thought," interrupted Bernice in bewilderment, "that you
despised little dainty feminine things like that."
"I hate dainty minds," answered Marjorie. "But a girl has to be
dainty in person. If she looks like a million dollars she can
talk about Russia, ping-pong, or the League of Nations and
get away with it." 

"What else?"
"Oh, I'm just beginning! There's your dancing."
"Don't I dance all right?"
"No, you don't--you lean on a man; yes, you do--ever so
slightly. I noticed it when we were dancing together
yesterday. And you dance standing up straight instead of
bending over a little. Probably some old lady on the side-line
once told you that you looked so dignified that way. But
except with a very small girl it's much harder on the man, and
he's the one that counts."
"Go on." Bernice's brain was reeling.
"Well, you've got to learn to be nice to men who are sad
birds. You look as if you'd been insulted whenever you're
thrown with any except the most popular boys. Why, Bernice,
I'm cut in on every few feet--and who does most of it? Why,
those very sad birds. No girl can afford to neglect them.
They're the big part of any crowd. Young boys too shy to talk
are the very best conversational practice. Clumsy boys are
the best dancing practice. If you can follow them and yet look
graceful you can follow a baby tank across a barb-wire skyscraper."
Bernice sighed profoundly, but Marjorie was not through.
"If you go to a dance and really amuse, say, three sad birds
that dance with you; if you talk so well to them that they
forget they're stuck with you, you've done something. They'll
come back next time, and gradually so many sad birds will
dance with you that the attractive boys will see there's no
danger of being stuck--then they'll dance with you."
"Yes," agreed Bernice faintly. "I think I begin to see."
"And finally," concluded Marjorie, "poise and charm will just
come. You'll wake up some morning knowing you've attained
it, and men will know it too."
Bernice rose.
"It's been awfully kind of you--but nobody's ever talked to me
like this before, and I feel sort of startled."
Marjorie made no answer but gazed pensively at her own
image in the mirror.
"You're a peach to help me," continued Bernice.
Still Marjorie did not answer, and Bernice thought she had
seemed too grateful.
"I know you don't like sentiment," she said timidly.
Marjorie turned to her quickly.
"Oh, I wasn't thinking about that. I was considering whether
we hadn't better bob your hair."
Bernice collapsed backward upon the bed.
IV
On the following Wednesday evening there was a dinnerdance at the country club. When the guests strolled in
Bernice found her place-card with a slight feeling of irritation.
Though at her right sat G. Reece Stoddard, a most desirable
and distinguished young bachelor, the all-important left held
only Charley Paulson. Charley lacked height, beauty, and
social shrewdness, and in her new enlightenment Bernice
decided that his only qualification to be her partner was that
he had never been stuck with her. But this feeling of irritation
left with the last of the soup-plates, and Marjorie's specific
instruction came to her. Swallowing her pride she turned to
Charley Paulson and plunged.
"Do you think I ought to bob my hair, Mr. Charley Paulson?"
Charley looked up in surprise.
"Why?"
"Because I'm considering it. It's such a sure and easy way of
attracting attention."
Charley smiled pleasantly. He could not know this had been
rehearsed. He replied that he didn't know much about
bobbed hair. But Bernice was there to tell him.
"I want to be a society vampire, you see," she announced
coolly, and went on to inform him that bobbed hair was the
necessary prelude. She added that she wanted to ask his
advice, because she had heard he was so critical about girls.
Charley, who knew as much about the psychology of women
as he did of the mental states of Buddhist contemplatives, felt
vaguely flattered.
"So I've decided," she continued, her voice rising slightly,
"that early next week I'm going down to the Sevier Hotel
barber-shop, sit in the first chair, and get my hair bobbed."
She faltered, noticing that the people near her had paused in
their conversation and were listening; but after a confused
second Marjorie's coaching told, and she finished her
paragraph to the vicinity at large. "Of course I'm charging
admission, but if you'll all come down and encourage me I'll
issue passes for the inside seats."
There was a ripple of appreciative laughter, and under cover
of it G. Reece Stoddard leaned over quickly and said close to
her ear: "I'll take a box right now."
She met his eyes and smiled as if he had said something
surpassingly brilliant.
"Do you believe in bobbed hair?" asked G. Reece in the
same undertone. 

"I think it's unmoral," affirmed Bernice gravely. "But, of
course, you've either got to amuse people or feed 'em or
shock 'em." Marjorie had culled this from Oscar Wilde. It was
greeted with a ripple of laughter from the men and a series of
quick, intent looks from the girls. And then as though she had
said nothing of wit or moment Bernice turned again to
Charley and spoke confidentially in his ear.
"I want to ask you your opinion of several people. I imagine
you're a wonderful judge of character."
Charley thrilled faintly--paid her a subtle compliment by
overturning her water.
Two hours later, while Warren McIntyre was standing
passively in the stag line abstractedly watching the dancers
and wondering whither and with whom Marjorie had
disappeared, an unrelated perception began to creep slowly
upon him--a perception that Bernice, cousin to Marjorie, had
been cut in on several times in the past five minutes. He
closed his eyes, opened them and looked again. Several
minutes back she had been dancing with a visiting boy, a
matter easily accounted for; a visiting boy would know no
better. But now she was dancing with some one else, and
there was Charley Paulson headed for her with enthusiastic
determination in his eye. Funny--Charley seldom danced with
more than three girls an evening.
Warren was distinctly surprised when--the exchange having
been effected--the man relieved proved to be none other
than G. Reece Stoddard himself. And G. Reece seemed not
at all jubilant at being relieved. Next time Bernice danced
near, Warren regarded her intently. Yes, she was pretty,
distinctly pretty; and to-night her face seemed really
vivacious. She had that look that no woman, however
histrionically proficient, can successfully counterfeit--she
looked as if she were having a good time. He liked the way
she had her hair arranged, wondered if it was brilliantine that
made it glisten so. And that dress was becoming--a dark red
that set off her shadowy eyes and high coloring. He
remembered that he had thought her pretty when she first
came to town, before he had realized that she was dull. Too
bad she was dull--dull girls unbearable--certainly pretty
though.
His thoughts zigzagged back to Marjorie. This disappearance
would be like other disappearances. When she reappeared
he would demand where she had been--would be told
emphatically that it was none of his business. What a pity she
was so sure of him! She basked in the knowledge that no
other girl in town interested him; she defied him to fall in love
with Genevieve or Roberta.
Warren sighed. The way to Marjorie's affections was a
labyrinth indeed. He looked up. Bernice was again dancing
with the visiting boy. Half unconsciously he took a step out
from the stag line in her direction, and hesitated. Then he
said to himself that it was charity. He walked toward her --
collided suddenly with G. Reece Stoddard.
"Pardon me," said Warren.
But G. Reece had not stopped to apologize. He had again
cut in on Bernice.
That night at one o'clock Marjorie, with one hand on the
electric-light switch in the hall, turned to take a last look at
Bernice's sparkling eyes.
"So it worked?"
"Oh, Marjorie, yes!" cried Bernice.
"I saw you were having a gay time."
"I did! The only trouble was that about midnight I ran short of
talk. I had to repeat myself--with different men of course. I
hope they won't compare notes."
"Men don't," said Marjorie, yawning, "and it wouldn't matter if
they did--they'd think you were even trickier."
She snapped out the light, and as they started up the stairs
Bernice grasped the banister thankfully. For the first time in
her life she had been danced tired.
"You see," said Marjorie at the top of the stairs, "one man
sees another man cut in and he thinks there must be
something there. Well, we'll fix up some new stuff to-morrow.
Good night."
"Good night."
As Bernice took down her hair she passed the evening
before her in review. She had followed instructions exactly.
Even when Charley Paulson cut in for the eighth time she
had simulated delight and had apparently been both
interested and flattered. She had not talked about the
weather or Eau Claire or automobiles or her school, but had
confined her conversation to me, you, and us.
But a few minutes before she fell asleep a rebellious thought
was churning drowsily in her brain--after all, it was she who
had done it. Marjorie, to be sure, had given her her
conversation, but then Marjorie got much of her conversation
out of things she read. Bernice had bought the red dress,
though she had never valued it highly before Marjorie dug it
out of her trunk--and her own voice had said the words, her
own lips had smiled, her own feet had danced. Marjorie nice
girl--vain, though--nice evening--nice boys--like Warren--
Warren--Warren--what's-his-name--Warren----
She fell asleep.
V
To Bernice the next week was a revelation. With the feeling
that people really enjoyed looking at her and listening to her
came the foundation of self-confidence. Of course there were
numerous mistakes at first. She did not know, for instance,
that Draycott Deyo was studying for the ministry; she was
unaware that he had cut in on her because he thought she
was a quiet, reserved girl. Had she known these things she
would not have treated him to the line which began "Hello,
Shell Shock!" and continued with the bathtub story--"It takes 

a frightful lot of energy to fix my hair in the summer--there's
so much of it--so I always fix it first and powder my face and
put on my hat; then I get into the bathtub, and dress
afterward. Don't you think that's the best plan?"
Though Draycott Deyo was in the throes of difficulties
concerning baptism by immersion and might possibly have
seen a connection, it must be admitted that he did not. He
considered feminine bathing an immoral subject, and gave
her some of his ideas on the depravity of modern society.
But to offset that unfortunate occurrence Bernice had several
signal successes to her credit. Little Otis Ormonde pleaded
off from a trip East and elected instead to follow her with a
puppy-like devotion, to the amusement of his crowd and to
the irritation of G. Reece Stoddard, several of whose
afternoon calls Otis completely ruined by the disgusting
tenderness of the glances he bent on Bernice. He even told
her the story of the two-by-four and the dressing-room to
show her how frightfully mistaken he and every one else had
been in their first judgment of her. Bernice laughed off that
incident with a slight sinking sensation.
Of all Bernice's conversation perhaps the best known and
most universally approved was the line about the bobbing of
her hair.
"Oh, Bernice, when you goin' to get the hair bobbed?"
"Day after to-morrow maybe," she would reply, laughing. "Will
you come and see me? Because I'm counting on you, you
know."
"Will we? You know! But you better hurry up."
Bernice, whose tonsorial intentions were strictly
dishonorable, would laugh again.
"Pretty soon now. You'd be surprised."
But perhaps the most significant symbol of her success was
the gray car of the hypercritical Warren McIntyre, parked
daily in front of the Harvey house. At first the parlor-maid was
distinctly startled when he asked for Bernice instead of
Marjorie; after a week of it she told the cook that Miss
Bernice had gotta hold a Miss Marjorie's best fella.
And Miss Bernice had. Perhaps it began with Warren's desire
to rouse jealousy in Marjorie; perhaps it was the familiar
though unrecognized strain of Marjorie in Bernice's
conversation; perhaps it was both of these and something of
sincere attraction besides. But somehow the collective mind
of the younger set knew within a week that Marjorie's most
reliable beau had made an amazing face-about and was
giving an indisputable rush to Marjorie's guest. The question
of the moment was how Marjorie would take it. Warren called
Bernice on the 'phone twice a day, sent her notes, and they
were frequently seen together in his roadster, obviously
engrossed in one of those tense,
significant conversations as to whether or not he was
sincere.
Marjorie on being twitted only laughed. She said she was
mighty glad that Warren had at last found some one who
appreciated him. So the younger set laughed, too, and
guessed that Marjorie didn't care and let it go at that.
One afternoon when there were only three days left of her
visit Bernice was waiting in the hall for Warren, with whom
she was going to a bridge party. She was in rather a blissful
mood, and when Marjorie--also bound for the party--
appeared beside her and began casually to adjust her hat in
the mirror, Bernice was utterly unprepared for anything in the
nature of a clash. Marjorie did her work very coldly and
succinctly in three sentences.
"You may as well get Warren out of your head," she said
coldly.
"What?" Bernice was utterly astounded.
"You may as well stop making a fool of yourself over Warren
McIntyre. He doesn't care a snap of his fingers about you."
For a tense moment they regarded each other--Marjorie
scornful, aloof; Bernice astounded, half-angry, half-afraid.
Then two cars drove up in front of the house and there was a
riotous honking. Both of them gasped faintly, turned, and side
by side hurried out.
All through the bridge party Bernice strove in vain to master a
rising uneasiness. She had offended Marjorie, the sphinx of
sphinxes. With the most wholesome and innocent intentions
in the world she had stolen Marjorie's property. She felt
suddenly and horribly guilty. After the bridge game, when
they sat in an informal circle and the conversation became
general, the storm gradually broke. Little Otis Ormonde
inadvertently precipitated it.
"When you going back to kindergarten, Otis?" some one had
asked.
"Me? Day Bernice gets her hair bobbed."
"Then your education's over," said Marjorie quickly. "That's
only a bluff of hers. I should think you'd have realized."
"That a fact?" demanded Otis, giving Bernice a reproachful
glance.
Bernice's ears burned as she tried to think up an effectual
come-back. In the face of this direct attack her imagination
was paralyzed.
"There's a lot of bluffs in the world," continued Marjorie quite
pleasantly. "I should think you'd be young enough to know
that, Otis."
"Well," said Otis, "maybe so. But gee! With a line like
Bernice's--"
"Really?" yawned Marjorie. "What's her latest bon mot?" 

No one seemed to know. In fact, Bernice, having trifled with
her muse's beau, had said nothing memorable of late.
"Was that really all a line?" asked Roberta curiously.
Bernice hesitated. She felt that wit in some form
was demanded of her, but under her cousin's suddenly frigid
eyes she was completely incapacitated.
"I don't know," she stalled.
"Splush!" said Marjorie. "Admit it!"
Bernice saw that Warren's eyes had left a ukulele he had
been tinkering with and were fixed on her questioningly.
"Oh, I don't know!" she repeated steadily. Her cheeks were
glowing.
"Splush!" remarked Marjorie again.
"Come through, Bernice," urged Otis. "Tell her where to get
off."
Bernice looked round again--she seemed unable to get away
from Warren's eyes.
"I like bobbed hair," she said hurriedly, as if he had asked her
a question, "and I intend to bob mine."
"When?" demanded Marjorie.
"Any time."
"No time like the present," suggested Roberta.
Otis jumped to his feet.
"Good stuff!" he cried. "We'll have a summer bobbing party.
Sevier Hotel barber-shop, I think you said."
In an instant all were on their feet. Bernice's heart throbbed
violently.
"What?" she gasped.
Out of the group came Marjorie's voice, very clear and
contemptuous.
"Don't worry--she'll back out!"
"Come on, Bernice!" cried Otis, starting toward the door.
Four eyes--Warren's and Marjorie's--stared at her,
challenged her, defied her. For another second she wavered
wildly.
"All right," she said swiftly, "I don't care if I do."
An eternity of minutes later, riding down-town through the
late afternoon beside Warren, the others following in
Roberta's car close behind, Bernice had all the sensations of
Marie Antoinette bound for the guillotine in a tumbrel.
Vaguely she wondered why she did not cry out that it was all
a mistake. It was all she could do to keep from clutching her
hair with both hands to protect it from the suddenly hostile
world. Yet she did neither. Even the thought of her mother
was no deterrent now. This was the test supreme of her
sportsmanship; her right to walk unchallenged in the starry
heaven of popular girls.
Warren was moodily silent, and when they came to the hotel
he drew up at the curb and nodded to Bernice to precede him
out. Roberta's car emptied a laughing crowd into the shop,
which presented two bold plate-glass windows to the street.
Bernice stood on the curb and looked at the sign, Sevier
Barber-Shop. It was a guillotine indeed, and the hangman
was the first barber, who, attired in a white coat and smoking
a cigarette, leaned nonchalantly against the first chair. He
must have heard of her; he must have been waiting all week,
smoking eternal cigarettes beside that portentous, too-oftenmentioned first chair. Would they blindfold her? No, but they
would tie a white cloth round her neck lest any of her blood--
nonsense--hair--should get on her clothes.
"All right, Bernice," said Warren quickly.
With her chin in the air she crossed the sidewalk, pushed
open the swinging screen-door, and giving not a glance to
the uproarious, riotous row that occupied the waiting bench,
went up to the first barber.
"I want you to bob my hair."
The first barber's mouth slid somewhat open. His cigarette
dropped to the floor.
"Huh?"
"My hair--bob it!"
Refusing further preliminaries, Bernice took her seat on high.
A man in the chair next to her turned on his side and gave
her a glance, half lather, half amazement. One barber started
and spoiled little Willy Schuneman's monthly haircut. Mr.
O'Reilly in the last chair grunted and swore musically in
ancient Gaelic as a razor bit into his cheek. Two bootblacks
became wide-eyed and rushed for her feet. No, Bernice
didn't care for a shine.
Outside a passer-by stopped and stared; a couple joined
him; half a dozen small boys' noses sprang into life, flattened
against the glass; and snatches of conversation borne on the
summer breeze drifted in through the screen-door.
"Lookada long hair on a kid!"
"Where'd yuh get 'at stuff? 'At's a bearded lady he just
finished shavin'." 

But Bernice saw nothing, heard nothing. Her only living
sense told her that this man in the white coat had removed
one tortoise-shell comb and then another; that his fingers
were fumbling clumsily with unfamiliar hairpins; that this hair,
this wonderful hair of hers, was going--she would never again
feel its long voluptuous pull as it hung in a dark-brown glory
down her back. For a second she was near breaking down,
and then the picture before her swam mechanically into her
vision--Marjorie's mouth curling in a faint ironic smile as if to
say:
"Give up and get down! You tried to buck me and I called
your bluff. You see you haven't got a prayer."
And some last energy rose up in Bernice, for she clinched
her hands under the white cloth, and there was a curious
narrowing of her eyes that Marjorie remarked on to some one
long afterward.
Twenty minutes later the barber swung her round to face the
mirror, and she flinched at the full extent of the damage that
had been wrought. Her hair was not curly, and now it lay in
lank lifeless blocks on both sides of her suddenly pale face. It
was ugly as sin--she had known it would be ugly as sin. Her
face's chief charm had been a Madonna-like simplicity. Now
that was gone and she was--well, frightfully mediocre--not
stagy; only ridiculous, like a Greenwich Villager who had left
her spectacles at home.
As she climbed down from the chair she tried to smile--failed
miserably. She saw two of the girls exchange glances;
noticed Marjorie's mouth curved in attenuated mockery--and
that Warren's eyes were suddenly very cold.
"You see"--her words fell into an awkward pause--"I've done
it."
"Yes, you've--done it," admitted Warren.
"Do you like it?"
There was a half-hearted "Sure" from two or three voices,
another awkward pause, and then Marjorie turned swiftly and
with serpentlike intensity to Warren.
"Would you mind running me down to the cleaners?" she
asked. "I've simply got to get a dress there before supper.
Roberta's driving right home and she can take the others."
Warren stared abstractedly at some infinite speck out the
window. Then for an instant his eyes rested coldly on Bernice
before they turned to Marjorie.
"Be glad to," he said slowly.
VI
Bernice did not fully realize the outrageous trap that had
been set for her until she met her aunt's amazed glance just
before dinner.
"Why, Bernice!"
"I've bobbed it, Aunt Josephine."
"Why, child!"
"Do you like it?"
"Why, Ber-nice!"
"I suppose I've shocked you."
"No, but what'll Mrs. Deyo think tomorrow night? Bernice, you
should have waited until after the Deyos' dance--you should
have waited if you wanted to do that."
"It was sudden, Aunt Josephine. Anyway, why does it matter
to Mrs. Deyo particularly?"
"Why, child," cried Mrs. Harvey, "in her paper on `The Foibles
of the Younger Generation' that she read at the last meeting
of the Thursday Club she devoted fifteen minutes to bobbed
hair. It's her pet abomination. And the dance is for you and
Marjorie!"
"I'm sorry."
"Oh, Bernice, what'll your mother say? She'll think I let you do
it."
"I'm sorry."
Dinner was an agony. She had made a hasty attempt with a
curling-iron, and burned her finger and much hair. She could
see that her aunt was both worried and grieved, and her
uncle kept saying, "Well, I'll be darned!" over and over in a
hurt and faintly hostile tone. And Marjorie sat very quietly,
intrenched behind a faint smile, a faintly mocking smile.
Somehow she got through the evening. Three boys called;
Marjorie disappeared with one of them, and Bernice made a
listless unsuccessful attempt to entertain the two others--
sighed thankfully as she climbed the stairs to her room at half
past ten. What a day!
When she had undressed for the night the door opened and
Marjorie came in.
"Bernice," she said, "I'm awfully sorry about the Deyo dance.
I'll give you my word of honor I'd forgotten all about it."
"'Sall right," said Bernice shortly. Standing before the mirror
she passed her comb slowly through her short hair.
"I'll take you down-town to-morrow," continued Marjorie, "and
the hairdresser'll fix it so you'll look slick. I didn't imagine
you'd go through with it. I'm really mighty sorry."
"Oh, 'sall right!" 

"Still it's your last night, so I suppose it won't matter much."
Then Bernice winced as Marjorie tossed her own hair over
her shoulders and began to twist it slowly into two long blond
braids until in her cream-colored negligée she looked like a
delicate painting of some Saxon princess. Fascinated,
Bernice watched the braids grow. Heavy and luxurious they
were, moving under the supple fingers like restive snakes--
and to Bernice remained this relic and the curling-iron and a
to-morrow full of eyes. She could see G. Reece Stoddard,
who liked her, assuming his Harvard manner and telling his
dinner partner that Bernice shouldn't have been allowed to
go to the movies so much; she could see Draycott Deyo
exchanging glances with his mother and then being
conscientiously charitable to her. But then perhaps by tomorrow Mrs. Deyo would have heard the news; would send
round an icy little note requesting that she fail to appear--and
behind her back they would all laugh and know that Marjorie
had made a fool of her; that her chance at beauty had been
sacrificed to the jealous whim of a selfish girl. She sat down
suddenly before the mirror, biting the inside of her cheek.
"I like it," she said with an effort. "I think it'll be becoming."
Marjorie smiled.
"It looks all right. For heaven's sake, don't let it worry you!"
"I won't."
"Good night, Bernice."
But as the door closed something snapped within Bernice.
She sprang dynamically to her feet, clinching her hands, then
swiftly and noiselessly crossed over to her bed and from
underneath it dragged out her suitcase. Into it she tossed
toilet articles and a change of clothing. Then she turned to
her trunk and quickly dumped in two drawerfuls of lingerie
and summer dresses. She moved quietly, but with deadly
efficiency, and in three-quarters of an hour her trunk was
locked and strapped and she was fully dressed in a
becoming new travelling suit that Marjorie had helped her
pick out.
Sitting down at her desk she wrote a short note to Mrs.
Harvey, in which she briefly outlined her reasons for going.
She sealed it, addressed it, and laid it on her pillow. She
glanced at her watch. The train left at one, and she knew that
if she walked down to the Marborough Hotel two blocks away
she could easily get a taxicab.
Suddenly she drew in her breath sharply and an expression
flashed into her eyes that a practised character reader might
have connected vaguely with the set look she had worn in
the barber's chair-- somehow a development of it. It was
quite a new look for Bernice and it carried consequences.
She went stealthily to the bureau, picked up an article that lay
there, and turning out all the lights stood quietly until her eyes
became accustomed to the darkness. Softly she pushed
open the door to Marjorie's room. She heard the quiet, even
breathing of an untroubled conscience asleep.
She was by the bedside now, very deliberate and calm. She
acted swiftly. Bending over she found one of the braids of
Marjorie's hair, followed it up with her hand to the point
nearest the head, and then holding it a little slack so that the
sleeper would feel no pull, she reached down with the shears
and severed it. With the pigtail in her hand she held her
breath. Marjorie had muttered something in her sleep.
Bernice deftly amputated the other braid, paused for an
instant, and then flitted swiftly and silently back to her own
room.
Down-stairs she opened the big front door, closed it carefully
behind her, and feeling oddly happy and exuberant stepped
off the porch into the moonlight, swinging her heavy grip like
a shopping-bag. After a minute's brisk walk she discovered
that her left hand still held the two blond braids. She laughed
unexpectedly--had to shut her mouth hard to keep from
emitting an absolute peal. She was passing Warren's house
now, and on the impulse she set down her baggage, and
swinging the braids like pieces of rope flung them at the
wooden porch, where they landed with a slight thud. She
laughed again, no longer restraining herself.
"Huh!" she giggled wildly. "Scalp the selfish thing!"
Then picking up her suitcase she set off at a half-run down
the moonlit street. 
