The principal dish at dinner had been croquettes made of turnip greens. So there follows a
trifle, concocted out of those dessert powders we use nowadays, that taste like almond
soap. Xaver, the youthful manservant, in his outgrown striped jacket, white woollen
gloves, and yellow sandals, hands it round, and the "big folk" take this opportunity to
remind their father, tactfully, that company is coming today.
 The "big folk" are two, Ingrid and Bert. Ingrid is brown-eyed, eighteen, and
perfectly delightful. She is on the eve of her exams, and will probably pass them, if only
because she knows how to wind masters, and even headmasters, round her finger. She
does not, however, mean to use her certificate once she gets it; having leanings towards
the stage, on the ground of her ingratiating smile, her equally ingratiating voice, and a
marked and irresistible talent for burlesque. Bert is blond and seventeen. He intends to
get done with school somehow, anyhow, and fling himself into the arms of life. He will
be a dancer, or a cabaret actor, possibly even a waiter-but not a waiter anywhere else save
at Cairo, the night-club, whither he has once already taken flight, at five in the morning,
and been brought back crestfallen. Bert bears a strong resemblance to the youthful
manservant, Xaver Kleinsgutl, of about the same age as himself; not because he looks
common-in features he is strikingly like his father, Professor Cornelius-but by reason of
an approximation of types, due in its turn to far-reaching compromises in matters of dress
and bearing generally. Both lads wear their heavy hair very long on top, with a cursory
parting in the middle, and give their heads the same characteristic toss to throw it off the
forehead. When one of them leaves the house, by the garden gate, bareheaded in all
weathers, in a blouse rakishly girt with a leather strap, and sheers off bent well over with
his head on one side; or else mounts his push-bike-Xaver makes free with his employers',
of both sexes, or even, in acutely irresponsible mood, with the Professor's own-Dr.
Cornelius from his bedroom window cannot, for the life of him, tell whether he is looking
at his son or his servant. Both, he thinks, look like young moujiks. And both are
impassioned cigarette-smokers, though Bert has not the means to compete with Xaver,
who smokes as many as thirty a day, of a brand named after a popular cinema star. The
big folk call their father and mother the "old folk"-not behind their backs, but as a form of
address and in all affection: "Hullo, old folks," they will say; though Cornelius is only
forty-seven years old and his wife eight years younger. And the Professor's parents, who
lead in his household the humble and hesitant life of the really old, are on the big folk's
lips the "ancients." As for the "little folk," Ellie and Snapper, who take their meals
upstairs with blue-faced Ann-so called because of her prevailing facial hue-Ellie and
Snapper follow their mother's example and address their father by his first name, Abel.
Unutterably comic it sounds, in its pert, confiding familiarity; particularly on the lips, in
the sweet accents, of five-year-old Eleanor, who is the image of Frau Cornelius's baby
pictures and whom the Professor loves above everything else in the world.
 "Darling old thing," says Ingrid affably, laying her large but shapely hand on his,
as he presides in proper middle-class style over the family table, with her on his left and
the mother opposite: "Parent mine, may I ever so gently jog your memory, for you have
probably forgotten: this is the afternoon we were to have our little jollification, our 
turkey-trot with eats to match. You haven't a thing to do but just bear up and not funk it;
everything will be over by nine o'clock."
 "Oh-ah!" says Cornelius, his face falling. "Good!" he goes on, and nods his head
to show himself in harmony with the inevitable. "I only meant-is this really the day?
Thursday, yes. How time flies! Well, what time are they coming?"
 "Half past four they'll be dropping in, I should say," answers Ingrid, to whom her
brother leaves the major role in all dealings with the father. Upstairs, while he is resting,
he will hear scarcely anything, and from seven to eight he takes his walk. He can slip out
by the terrace if he likes.
 "Tut!" says Cornelius deprecatingly, as who should say: "You exaggerate." But
Bert puts in: "It's the one evening in the week Wanja doesn't have to play. Any other
night he'd have to leave by half past six, which would be painful for all concerned."
 Wanja is Ivan Herzl, the celebrated young leading man at the Stadttheater. Bert
and Ingrid are on intimate terms with him, they often visit him in his dressing-room and
have tea. He is an artist of the modern school, who stands on the stage in strange and, to
the Professor's mind, utterly affected dancing attitudes, and shrieks lamentably. To a
professor of history, all highly repugnant; but Bert has entirely succumbed to Herzl's
influence, blackens the lower rim of his eyelids-despite painful but fruitless scenes with
the father-and with youthful carelessness of the ancestral anguish declares that not only
will he take Herzl for his model if he becomes a dancer, but in case he turns out to be a
waiter at the Cairo he means to walk precisely thus.
 Cornelius slightly raises his brows and makes his son a little bow-indicative of the
unassumingness and self-abnegation that befits his age. You could not call it a mocking
bow or suggestive in any special sense. Bert may refer it to himself or equally to his so
talented friend.
 "Who else is coming?" next inquires the master of the house. They mention
various people, names all more or less familiar, from the city, from the suburban colony,
from Ingrid's school. They still have some telephoning to do, they say. They have to
phone Max. This is Max Hergesell, an engineering student; Ingrid utters his name in the
nasal drawl which according to her is the traditional intonation of all the Hergesells. She
goes on to parody it in the most abandonedly funny and lifelike way, and the parents
laugh until they nearly choke over the wretched trifle. For even in these times when
something funny happens people have to laugh.
 From time to time the telephone bell rings in the Professor's study, and the big
folk run across, knowing it is their affair. Many people had to give up their telephones the
last time the price rose, but so far the Corneliuses have been able to keep theirs, just as
they have kept their villa, which was built before the war, by dint of the salary Cornelius
draws as professor of history-a million marks, and more or less adequate to the chances
and changes of post-war life. The house is comfortable, even elegant, though sadly in
need of repairs that cannot be made for lack of materials, and at present disfigured by
iron stoves with long pipes. Even so, it is still the proper setting of the upper middle class,
though they themselves look odd enough in it, with their worn and turned clothing and
altered way of life. The children, of course, know nothing else; to them it is normal and
regular, they belong by birth to the "villa proletariat." The problem of clothing troubles
them not at all. They and their like have evolved a costume to fit the time, by poverty out 
of taste for innovation: in summer it consists of scarcely more than a belted linen smock
and sandals. The middle-class parents find things rather more difficult.
 The big folk's table-napkins hang over their chair-backs, they talk with their
friends over the telephone. These friends are the invited guests who have rung up to
accept or decline or arrange; and the conversation is carried on in the jargon of the clan,
full of slang and high spirits, of which the old folk understand hardly a word. These
consult together meantime about the hospitality to be offered to the impending guests.
The Professor displays a middle-class ambitiousness: he wants to serve a sweet-or
something that looks like a sweet-after the Italian salad and brownbread sandwiches. But
Frau Cornelius says that would be going too far. The guests would not expect it, she is
sure-and the big folk, returning once more to their trifle, agree with her.
 The mother of the family is of the same general type as Ingrid, though not so tall.
She is languid; the fantastic difficulties of the housekeeping have broken and worn her.
She really ought to go and take a cure, but feels incapable; the floor is always swaying
under her feet, and everything seems upside down. She speaks of what is uppermost in
her mind: the eggs, they simply must be bought today. Six thousand marks apiece they
are, and just so many are to be had on this one day of the week at one single shop fifteen
minutes' journey away. Whatever else they do, the big folk must go and fetch them
immediately after luncheon, with Danny, their neighbour's son, who will soon be calling
for them; and Xaver Kleinsgutl will don civilian garb and attend his young master and
mistress. For no single household is allowed more than five eggs a week; therefore the
young people will enter the shop singly, one after another, under assumed names, and
thus wring twenty eggs from the shopkeeper for the Cornelius family. This enterprise is
the sporting event of the week for all participants, not excepting the moujik Kleinsgutl,
and most of all for Ingridand Bert, who delight in misleading and mystifying their fellowmen and would revel in the performance even if it did not achieve one single egg. They
adore impersonating fictitious characters; they love to sit in a bus and carry on long
lifelike conversations in a dialect which they otherwise never speak, the most
commonplace dialogue about politics and people and the price of food, while the whole
bus listens openmouthed to this incredibly ordinary prattle, though with a dark suspicion
all the while that something is wrong somewhere. The conversation waxes ever more
shameless, it enters into revolting detail about these people who do not exist. Ingrid can
make her voice sound ever so common and twittering and shrill as she impersonates a
shop-girl with an illegitimate child, said child being a son with sadistic tendencies, who
lately out in the country treated a cow with such unnatural cruelty that no Christian could
have borne to see it. Bert nearly explodes at her twittering, but restrains himself and
displays a grisly sympathy; he and the unhappy shop-girl entering into a long, stupid,
depraved, and shuddery conversation over the particular morbid cruelty involved, until an
old gentleman opposite, sitting with his ticket folded between his index finger and his
seal ring, can bear it no more and makes public protest against the nature of the themes
these young folk are discussing with such particularity. He uses the Greek plural:
"themata." Whereat Ingrid pretends to be dissolving in tears, and Bert behaves as though
his wrath against the old gentleman was with difficulty being held in check and would
probably burst out before long. He clenches his fists, he gnashes his teeth, he shakes from
head to foot; and the unhappy old gentleman, whose intentions had been of the best,
hastily leaves the bus at the next stop. 
 Such are the diversions of the big folk. The telephone plays a prominent part in
them: they ring up any and everybodymembers of government, opera singers, dignitaries
of the Church-in the character of shop assistants, or perhaps as Lord or Lady Doolittle.
They are only with difficulty persuaded that they have the wrong number. Once they
emptied their parents' card-tray and distributed its contents among the neighbours' letterboxes, wantonly, yet not without enough impish sense of the fitness of things to make it
highly upsetting. God only knowing why certain people should have called where they
did.
 Xaver comes in to clear away, tossing the hair out of his eyes. Now that he has
taken off his gloves you can see the yellow chain-ring on his left hand. And as the
Professor finishes his watery eight-thousand-mark beer and lights a cigarette, the little
folk can be heard scrambling down the stair, coming, by established custom, for their
after-dinner call on Father and Mother. They storm the dining-room, after a struggle with
the latch, clutched by both pairs of little hands at once; their clumsy small feet twinkle
over the carpet, in red felt slippers with the socks falling down on them. With prattle and
shoutings each makes for his own place: Snapper to Mother, to climb on her lap, boast of
all he has eaten, and thump his fat little turn; Ellie to her Abel, so much hers because she
is so very much his; because she consciously luxuriates in the deep tenderness-like all
deep feeling, concealing a melancholy strain-with which he holds her small form
embraced; in the love in his eyes as he kisses her little fairy hand or the sweet brow with
its delicate tracery of tiny blue veins.
 The little folk look like each other, with the strong undefined likeness of brother
and sister. In clothing and haircut they are twins. Yet they are sharply distinguished after
all, and quite on sex lines. It is a little Adam and a little Eve. Not only is Snapper the
sturdier and more compact, he appears consciously to emphasize his four-year-old
masculinity in speech, manner, and carriage, lifting his shoulders and letting the little
arms hang down quite like a young American athlete, drawing down his mouth when he
talks and seeking to give his voice a gruff and forthright ring. But all this masculinity is
the result of effort rather than natively his. Born and brought up in these desolate,
distracted times, he has been endowed by them with an unstable and hypersensitive
nervous system and suffers greatly under life's disharmonies. He is prone to sudden anger
and outbursts of bitter tears, stamping his feet at every trifle; for this reason he is his
mother'sspeciaI nursling and care. His round, round eyes are chestnut brown and already
inclined to squint, so that he will need glasses in the near future. His little nose is long,
the mouth small-the father's nose and mouth they are, more plainly than ever since the
Professor shaved his pointed beard and goes smooth-faced. The pointed beard had
become impossible-even professors must make some concession to the changing times.
 But the little daughter sits on her father's knee, his Eleonorchen, his little Eve, so
much more gracious a little being, so much sweeter-faced than her brother-and he holds
his cigarette away from her while she fingers his glasses with her dainty wee hands. The
lenses are divided for reading and distance, and each day they tease her curiosity afresh.
 At bottom he suspects that his wife's partiality may have a firmer basis than his
own; that Snapper's refractory masculinity perhaps is solider stuff than his own little girl's
more explicit charm and grace. But the heart will not be commanded, that he knows; and
once and for all his heart belongs to the little one, as it has since the day she came, since
the first time he saw her. 
 Almost always when he holds her in his arms he remembers that first time:
remembers the sunny room in the Women's Hospital, where Ellie first saw the light,
twelve years after Bert was born. He remembers how he drew near, the mother smiling
the while, and cautiously put aside the canopy of the diminutive bed that stood beside the
large one. There lay the little miracle among the pillows: so well formed, so
encompassed, as it were, with the harmony of sweet proportions, with little hands that
even then, though so much tinier, were beautiful as now; with wide-open eyes blue as the
sky and brighter than the sunshine-and almost in that very second he felt himself captured
and held fast. This was love at first sight, love everlasting: a feeling unknown, unhoped
for, unexpected-in so far as it could be a matter of conscious awareness; it took entire
possession of him, and he understood, with joyous amazement, that this was for life.
 But he understood more. He knows, does Dr. Cornelius, that there is something
not quite right about this feeling, so unaware, so undreamed of, so involuntary. He has a
shrewd suspicion that it is not by accident it has so utterly mastered him and bound itself
up with his existence; that he had-even subconsciouslybeen preparing for it, or, more
precisely, been prepared for it. There is, in short, something in him which at a given
moment was ready to issue in such a feeling; and this something, highly extraordinary to
relate, is his essence and quality as a professor of history. Dr. Cornelius, however, does
not actually say this, even to himself; he merely realizes it, at odd times, and smiles a
private smile. He knows that history professors do not love history because it is
something that comes to pass, but only because it is something that has come to pass; that
they hate a revolution like the present one because they feel it is lawless, incoherent,
irrelevant-in a word, unhistoric; that their hearts belong to the coherent, disciplined,
historic past. For the temper of timelessness, the temper of eternity-thus the scholar
communes with himself when he takes his walk by the river before supper-that temper
broods over the past; and it is a temper much better suited to the nervous system of a
history professor than are the excesses of the present. The past is immortalized; that is to
say, it is dead; and death is the root of all godliness and all abiding significance. Dr.
Cornelius, walking alone in the dark, has a profound insight into this truth. It is this
conservative instinct of his, his sense of the eternal, that has found in his love for his little
daughter a way to save itself from the wounding inflicted by the times. For father love,
and a little child on its mother's breast--are not these timeless, and thus very, very holy
and beautiful? Yet Cornelius, pondering there in the dark, descries something not
perfectly right and good in his love. Theoretically, in the interests of science, he admits it
to himself. There is something ulterior about it, in the nature of it; that something is
hostility, hostility against the history of today, which is still in the making and thus not
history at all, in behalf of the genuine history that has already happened-that is to say,
death. Yes, passing strange though all this is, yet it is true; true in a sense, that is. His
devotion to this priceless little morsel of life and new growth has something to do with
death, it clings to death as against life; and that is neither right nor beautiful-in a sense.
Though only the most fanatical asceticism could be capable, on no other ground than
such casual scientific perception, of tearing this purest and most precious of feelings out
of his heart.
 He holds his darling on his lap and her slim rosy legs hang down. He raises his
brows as he talks to her, tenderly, with a half-teasing note of respect, and listens
enchanted to her high, sweet little voice calling him Abel. He exchanges a look with the 
mother, who is caressing her Snapper and reading him a gentle lecture. He must be more
reasonable, he must learn self-control; today again, under the manifold exasperations of
life, he has given way to rage and behaved like a howling dervish. Cornelius casts a
mistrustful glance at the big folk now and then, too; he thinks it not unlikely they are not
unaware of those scientific preoccupations of his evening walks. If such be the case they
do not show it. They stand there leaning their arms on their chairbacks and with a
benevolence not untinctured with irony look on at the parental happiness.
 The children's frocks are of a heavy, brick-red stuff, embroidered in modern
"arty" style. They once belonged to Ingrid and Bert and are precisely alike, save that little
knickers come out beneath Snapper's smock. And both have their hair bobbed. Snapper's
is a streaky blond, inclined to turn dark. It is bristly and sticky and looks for all the world
like a droll, badly fitting wig. But Ellie's is chestnut brown, glossy and fine as silk, as
pleasing as her whole little personality. It covers her ears-and these ears are not a pair,
one of them being the right size, the other distinctly too large. Her father will sometimes
uncover this little abnormality and exclaim over it as though he had never noticed it
before, which both makes Ellie giggle and covers her with shame. Her eyes are now
golden brown, set far apart and with sweet gleams in them-such a clear and lovely look!
The brows above are blond; the nose still unformed, with thick nostrils and almost
circular holes; the mouth large and expressive, with a beautifully arching and mobile
upper lip. When she laughs, dimples come in her cheeks and she shows her teeth like
loosely strung pearls. So far she has lost but one tooth, which her father gently twisted
out with his handkerchief after it had grown very wobbling. During this small operation
she had paled and trembled very much. Her cheeks have the softness proper to her years,
but they are not chubby; indeed, they are rather concave, due to her facial structure, with
its somewhat prominent jaw. On one, close to the soft fall of her hair, is a downy freckle.
 Ellie is not too well pleased with her looks-a sign that already she troubles about
such things. Sadly she thinks it is best to admit it once for all, her face is "homely";
though the rest of her, "on the other hand," is not bad at all. She loves expressions like
"on the other hand"; they sound choice and grown-up to her, and she likes to string them
together, one after the other: "very likely,"
 "probably,"
 "after all." Snapper is self-critical too, though more in the moral sphere: he suffers
from remorse for his attacks of rage and considers himself a tremendous sinner. He is
quite certain that heaven is not for such as he; he is sure to go to "the bad place" when he
dies, and no persuasions will convince him to the contrary-as that God sees the heart and
gladly makes allowances. Obstinately he shakes his head, with the comic, crooked little
peruke, and vows there is no place for him in heaven. When he has a cold he is
immediately quite choked with mucus; rattles and rumbles from top to toe if you even
look at him; his temperature flies up at once and he simply puffs. Nursy is pessimistic on
the score of his constitution: such fat-blooded children as he might get a stroke any
minute. Once she even thought she saw the moment at hand: Snapper had been in one of
his berserker rages, and in the ensuing fit of penitence stood himself in the corner with
his back to the room. Suddenly Nursy noticed that his face had gone all blue, far bluer,
even, than her own. She raised the alarm, crying out that the child's all too rich blood had
at length brought him to his final hour; and Snapper, to his vast astonishment, found
himself, so far from being rebuked for evil-doing, encompassed in tenderness and 
anxiety-until it turned out that his colour was not caused by apoplexy but by the
distempering on the nursery wall, which had come off on his tear-wet face.
 Nursy has come downstairs too, and stands by the door, sleekhaired, owl-eyed,
with her hands folded over her white apron, and a severely dignified manner born of her
limited intelligence. She is very proud of the care and training she gives her nurslings and
declares that they are "enveloping wonderfully." She has had seventeen suppurated teeth
lately removed from her jaws and been measured for a set of symmetrical yellow ones in
dark rubber gums; these now embellish her peasant face. She is obsessed with the strange
conviction that these teeth of hers are the subject of general conversation, that, as it were,
the sparrows on the housetops chatter of them. "Everybody knows I've had a false set put
in," she will say; "there has been a great deal of foolish talk about them." She is much
given to dark hints and veiled innuendo: speaks, for instance, of a certain Dr. Bleifuss,
whom every child knows, and "there are even some in the house who pretend to be him."
All one can do with talk like this is charitably to pass it over in silence. But she teaches
the children nursery rhymes: gems like: "Puff, puff, here comes the train! Puff, puff, toot,
toot, Away it goes again."
 Or that gastronomical jingle, so suited, in its sparseness, to the times, and yet
seemingly with a blitheness of its own: "Monday we begin the week, Tuesday there's a
bone to pick. Wednesday we're half way through, Thursday what a great to-do! Friday we
eat what fish we're able, Saturday we dance round the table. Sunday brings us pork and
greensHere's a feast for kings and queens!"
 Also a certain four-line stanza with a romantic appeal, unutterable and unuttered:
"Open the gate, open the gate And let the carriage drive in. Who is it in the carriage sits?
A lordly sir with golden hair."
 Or, finally that ballad about golden-haired Marianne who sat on a, sat on a, sat on
a stone, and combed out her, combed out her, combed out her hair; and about bloodthirsty Rudolph, who pulled out a, pulled out a, pulled out a knife-and his ensuing direful
end. Ellie enunciates all these ballads charmingly, with her mobile little lips, and sings
them in her sweet little voicemuch better than Snapper. She does everything better than
he does, and he pays her honest admiration and homage and obeys her in all things except
when visited by one of his attacks. Sometimes she teaches him, instructs him upon the
birds in the picture-book and tells him their proper names: "This is a chaffinch, Buddy,
this is a bullfinch, this is a cowfinch." He has to repeat them after her. She gives him
medical instruction too, teaches him the names of diseases, such as infammation of the
lungs, infammation of the blood, infammation of the air. If he does not pay attention and
cannot say the words after her, she stands him in the corner. Once she even boxed his
ears, but was so ashamed that she stood herself in the corner for a long time. Yes, they
are fast friends, two souls with but a single thought, and have all their adventures in
common. They come home from a walk and relate as with one voice that they have seen
two moolies and a teenty-weenty baby calf. They are on familiar terms with the kitchen,
which consists of Xaver and the ladies Hinterhofer, two sisters once of the lower middle
class who, in these evil days, are reduced to living "au pair" as the phrase goes and
officiating as cook and housemaid for their board and keep. The little ones have a feeling
that Xaver and the Hinterhofers are on much the same footing with their father and
mother as they are themselves. At least sometimes, when they have been scolded, they go
downstairs and announce that the master and mistress are cross. But playing with the 
servants lacks charm compared with the joys of playing upstairs. The kitchen could never
rise to the height of the games their father can invent. For instance, there is "four
gentlemen taking a walk." When they play it Abel will crook his knees until he is the
same height with themselves and go walking with them, hand in hand. They never get
enough of this sport; they could walk round and round the dining-room a whole day on
end, five gentlemen in all, counting the diminished Abel.
 Then there is the thrilling cushion game. One of the children, usually Ellie, seats
herself, unbeknownst to Abel, in his seat at table. Still as a mouse she awaits his coming.
He draws near with his head in the air, descanting in loud, clear tones upon the surpassing
comfort of his chair; and sits down on top of Ellie. "What's this, what's this?" says he.
And bounces about, deaf to the smothered giggles exploding behind him. "Why have they
put a cushion in my chair? And what a queer, hard, awkwardshaped cushion it is!" he
goes on. "Frightfully uncomfortable to sit on!" And keeps pushing and bouncing about
more and more on the astonishing cushion and clutching behind him into the rapturous
giggling and squeaking, until at last he turns round, and the game ends with a magnificent
climax of discovery and recognition. They might go through all this a hundred times
without diminishing by an iota its power to thrill.
 Today is no time for such joys. The imminent festivity disturbs the atmosphere,
and besides there is work to be done, and, above all, the eggs to be got. Ellie has just time
to recite "Puff, puff," and Cornelius to discover that her ears are not mates, when they are
interrupted by the arrival of Danny, come to fetch Bert and Ingrid. Xaver, meantime, has
exchanged his striped livery for an ordinary coat, in which he looks rather roughandready, though as brisk and attractive as ever. So then Nursy and the children ascend to
the upper regions, the Professor withdraws to his study to read, as always after dinner,
and his wife bends her energies upon the sandwiches and salad that must be prepared.
And she has another errand as well. Before the young people arrive she has to take her
shopping-basket and dash into town on her bicycle, to turn into provisions a sum of
money she has in hand, which she dares not keep lest it lose all value.
 Cornelius reads, leaning back in his chair, with his cigar between his middle and
index fingers. First he reads Macaulay on the origin of the English public debt at the end
of the seventeenth century; then an article in a French periodical on the rapid increase in
the Spanish debt towards the end of the sixteenth. Both these for his lecture on the
morrow. He intends to compare the astonishing prosperity which accompanied the
phenomenon in England with its fatal effects a hundred years earlier in Spain, and to
analyse the ethical and psychological grounds of the difference in results. For that will
give him a chance to refer back from the England of William III, which is the actual
subject in hand, to the time of Philip II and the Counter-Reformation, which is his own
special field. He has already written a valuable work on this period; it is much cited and
got him his professorship. While his cigar burns down and gets strong, he excogitates a
few pensive sentences in a key of gentle melancholy, to be delivered before his class next
day: about the practically hopeless struggle carried on by the belated Philip against the
whole trend of history: against the new, the kingdom-disrupting power of the Germanic
ideal of freedom and individual liberty. And about the persistent, futile struggle of the
aristocracy, condemned by God and rejected of man, against the forces of progress and
change. He savours his sentences; keeps on polishing them while he puts back the books
he has been using; then goes upstairs for the usual pause in his day's work, the hour with 
drawn blinds and closed eyes, which he so imperatively needs. But today, he recalls, he
will rest under disturbed conditions, amid the bustle of preparations for the feast. He
smiles to find his heart giving a mild flutter at the thought. Disjointed phrases on the
theme of black-clad Philip and his times mingle with a confused consciousness that they
will soon be dancing down below. For five minutes or so he falls asleep.
 As he lies and rests he can hear the sound of the garden gate and the repeated
ringing at the bell. Each time a little pang goes through him, of excitement and suspense,
at the thought that the young people have begun to fill the floor below. And each time he
smiles at himself again-though even his smile is slightly nervous, is tinged with the
pleasurable anticipations people always feel before a party. At half past four-it is already
darkhe gets up and washes at the wash-stand. The basin has been out of repair for two
years. It is supposed to tip, but has broken away from its socket on one side and cannot be
mended because there is nobody to mend it; neither replaced because no shop can supply
another. So it has to be hung up above the vent and emptied by lifting in both hands and
pouring out the water. Cornelius shakes his head over this basin, as he does several times
a day-whenever, in fact, he has occasion to use it. He finishes his toilet with care,
standing under the ceiling light to polish his glasses till they shine. Then he goes
downstairs.
 On his way to the dining-room he hears the gramophone already going, and the
sound of voices. He puts on a polite, society air; at his tongue's end is the phrase he
means to utter: "Pray don't let me disturb you," as he passes directly into the dining-room
for his tea. "Pray don't let me disturb you"-it seems to him precisely the mot juste;
towards the guests cordial and considerate, for himself a very bulwark.
 The lower floor is lighted up, all the bulbs in the chandelier are burning save one
that has burned out. Cornelius pauses on a lower step and surveys the entrance hail. It
looks pleasant and cosy in the bright light, with its copy of Marées over the brick
chimney-piece, its wainscoted walls-wainscoted in soft woodand red-carpeted floor,
where the guests stand in groups, chatting, each with his tea-cup and slice of bread-andbutter spread with anchovy paste. There is a festal haze, faint scents of hair and clothing
and human breath come to him across the room, it is all characteristic and familiar and
highly evocative. The door into the dressing-room is open, guests are still arriving.
 A large group of people is rather bewildering at first sight. The Professor takes in
only the general scene. He does not see Ingrid, who is standing just at the foot of the
steps, in a dark silk frock with a pleated collar falling softly over the shoulders, and bare
arms. She smiles up at him, nodding and showing her lovely teeth.
 "Rested?" she asks, for his private ear. With a quite unwarranted start he
recognizes her, and she presents some of her friends.
 "May I introduce Herr Zuber?" she says. "And this is Fräulein Plaichinger."
 Herr Zuber is insignificant. But Fräulein Piaichinger is a perfect Germania, blond
and voluptuous, arrayed in floating draperies. She has a snub nose, and answers the
Professor's salutation in the high, shrill pipe so many stout women have.
 "Delighted to meet you," he says. "How nice of you to come! A classmate of
Ingrid's, I suppose?"
 And Herr Zuber is a golfing partner of Ingrid's. He is in business; he works in his
uncle's brewery. Cornelius makes a few jokes about the thinness of the beer and professes 
to believe that Herr Zuber could easily do something about the quality if he would. "But
pray don't let me disturb you," he goes on, and turns towards the dining-room.
 "There comes Max," says Ingrid. "Max, you sweep, what do you mean by rolling
up at this time of day?" For such is the way they talk to each other, offensively to an
older ear; of social forms, of hospitable warmth, there is no faintest trace. They all call
each other by their first names.
 A young man comes up to them out of the dressing-room and makes his bow; he
has an expanse of white shirt-front and a little black string tie. He is as pretty as a picture,
dark, with rosy cheeks, clean-shaven of course, but with just a sketch of sidewhisker. Not
a ridiculous or flashy beauty, not like a gypsy fiddler, but just charming to look at, in a
winning, well-bred way, with kind dark eyes. He even wears his dinner-jacket a little
awkwardly.
 "Please don't scold me, Cornelia," he says; "it's the idiotic lectures." And Ingrid
presents him to her father as Herr Hergesell.
 Well, and so this is Herr Hergesell. He knows his manners, does Herr Hergesell,
and thanks the master of the house quite ingratiatingly for his invitation as they shake
hands. "I certainly seem to have missed the bus," says he jocosely. "Of course I have
lectures today up to four o'clock; I would have; and after that I had to go home to
change." Then he talks about his pumps, with which he has just been struggling in the
dressing-room.
 "I brought them with me in a bag," he goes on. "Mustn't tramp all over the carpet
in our brogues-it's not done. Well, I was ass enough not to fetch along a shoe-horn, and I
find I simply can't get in! What a sell! They are the tightest I've ever had, the numbers
don't tell you a thing, and all the leather today is just cast iron. It's not leather at all. My
poor finger"-he confidingly displays a reddened digit and once more characterizes the
whole thing as a "sell," and a putrid sell into the bargain. He really does talk just as Ingrid
said he did, with a peculiar nasal drawl, not affectedly in the least, but merely because
that is the way of all the Hergesells.
 Dr. Cornelius says it is very careless of them not to keep a shoe-horn in the cloakroom and displays proper sympathy with the mangled finger. "But now you really must
not let me disturb you any longer," he goes on. "Auf wiedersehen!" And he crosses the
hall into the dining-room.
 There are guests there too, drinking tea; the family table is pulled out. But the
Professor goes at once to his own little upholstered corner with the electric light bulb
above it-the nook where he usually drinks his tea. His wife is sitting there talking with
Bert and two other young men, one of them Herzl, whom Cornelius knows and greets;
the other a typical "Wandervogel" named Möller, a youth who obviously neither owns
nor cares to own the correct evening dress of the middle classes (in fact, there is no such
thing any more), nor to ape the manners of a gentleman (and, in fact, there is no such
thing any more either). He has a wilderness of hair, horn spectacles, and a long neck, and
wears golf stockings and a belted blouse. His regular occupation, the Professor learns, is
banking, but he is by way of being an amateur folk-lorist and collects folk-songs from all
localities and in all languages. He sings them, too, and at Ingrid's command has brought
his guitar; it is hanging in the dressing-room in an oilcloth case. Herzl, the actor, is small
and slight, but he has a strong growth of black beard, as you can tell by the thick coat of
powder on his cheeks. His eyes are larger than life, with a deep and melancholy glow. He 
has put on rouge besides the powder-those dull carmine high-lights on the cheeks can be
nothing but a cosmetic. "Queer," thinks the Professor. "You would think a man would be
one thing or the other-not melancholic and use face paint at the same time. It's a
psychological contradiction. How can a melancholy man rouge? But here we have a
perfect illustration of the abnormality of the artist soulform. It can make possible a
contradiction like this-perhaps it even consists in the contradiction. All very interestingand no reason whatever for not being polite to him. Politeness is a primitive conventionand legitimate.... Do take some lemon, Herr Hofschauspieler!"
 Court actors and court theatres-there are no such things any more, really. But
Herzl relishes the sound of the title, notwithstanding he is a revolutionary artist. This
must be another contradiction inherent in his soul-form; so, at least, the Professor
assumes, and he is probably right. The flattery he is guilty of is a sort of atonement for his
previous hard thoughts about the rouge.
 "Thank you so much-it's really too good of you, sir," says Herzl, quite
embarrassed. He is so overcome that he almost stammers; only his perfect enunciation
saves him. His whole bearing towards his hostess and the master of the house is
exaggeratedly polite. It is almost as though he had a bad conscience in respect of his
rouge; as though an inward compulsion had driven him to put it on, but now, seeing it
through the Professor's eyes, he disapproves of it himself, and thinks, by an air of
humility towards the whole of unrouged society, to mitigate its effect.
 They drink their tea and chat: about Möller's folk-songs, about Basque folk-songs
and Spanish folk-songs; from which they pass to the new production of Don Carlos at the
Stadttheater, in which Herzl plays the title-role. He talks about his own rendering of the
part and says he hopes his conception of the character has unity. They go on to criticize
the rest of the cast, the setting, and the production as a whole; and Cornelius is struck,
rather painfully, to find the conversation trending towards his own special province, back
to Spain and the Counter-Reformation. He has done nothing at all to give it this turn, he
is perfectly innocent, and hopes it does not look as though he had sought an occasion to
play the professor. He wonders, and falls silent, feeling relieved when the little folk come
up to the table. Ellie and Snapper have on their blue velvet Sunday frocks; they are
permitted to partake in the festivities up to bed-time. They look shy and large-eyed as
they say how-do-you-do to the strangers and, under pressure, repeat their names and ages.
Herr MOller does nothing but gaze at them solemnly, but Herzl is simply ravished. He
rolls his eyes up to heaven and puts his hands over his mouth; he positively blesses them.
It all, no doubt, comes from his heart, but he is so addicted to theatrical methods of
making an impression and getting an effect that both words and behavior ring frightfully
false. And even his enthusiasm for the little folk looks too much like part of his general
craving to make up for the rouge on his cheeks.
 The tea-table has meanwhile emptied of guests, and dancing is going on in the
hail. The children run off, the Professor pre- pares to retire. "Go and enjoy yourselves,"
he says to Möller and Herzl, who have sprung from their chairs as he rises from his. They
shake hands and he withdraws into his study, his peaceful kingdom, where he lets down
the blinds, turns on the desk lamp, and sits down to his work.
 It is work which can be done, if necessary, under disturbed conditions: nothing
but a few letters and a few notes. Of course, Cornelius's mind wanders. Vague
impressions float through it: Herr Hergesell's refractory pumps, the high pipe in that 
plump body of the Plaichinger female. As he writes, or leans back in his chair and stares
into space, his thoughts go back to Herr Möller's collection of Basque folk-songs, to
Herzl's posings and humility, to "his" Carlos and the court of Philip II. There is
something strange, he thinks, about conversations. They are so ductile, they will flow of
their own accord in the direction of one's dominating interest. Often and often he has seen
this happen. And while he is thinking, he is listening to the sounds next door-rather
subdued, he finds them. He hears only voices, no sound of footsteps. The dancers do not
glide or circle round the room; they merely walk about over the carpet, which does not
hamper their movements in the least. Their way of holding each other is quite different
and strange, and they move to the strains of the gramophone, to the weird music of the
new world. He concentrates on the music and makes out that it is a jazz-band record, with
various percussion instruments and the clack and clatter of castanets, which, however, are
not even faintly suggestive of Spain, but merely jazz like the rest. No, not Spain.... His
thoughts are back at their old round.
 Half an hour goes by. It occurs to him it would be no more than friendly to go and
contribute a box of cigarettes to the festivities next door. Too bad to ask the young people
to smoke their own-though they have probably never thought of it. He goes into the
empty dining-room and takes a box from his supply in the cupboard: not the best ones,
nor yet the brand he himself prefers, but a certain long, thin kind he is not averse to
getting rid of-after all, they are nothing but youngsters. He takes the box into the hall,
holds it up with a smile, and deposits it on the mantel-shelf. After which he gives a look
round and returns to his own room.
 There comes a lull in dance and music. The guests stand about the room in groups
or round the table at the window or are seated in a circle by the fireplace. Even the builtin stairs, with their worn velvet carpet, are crowded with young folk as in an
amphitheatre: Max Hergesell is there, leaning back with one elbow on the step above and
gesticulating with his free hand as he talks to the shrill, voluptuous Plaichinger. The floor
of the hail is nearly empty, save just in the centre: there, directly beneath the chandelier,
the two little ones in their blue velvet frocks clutch each other in an awkward embrace
and twirl silently round and round, oblivious of all else. Cornelius, as he passes, strokes
their hair, with a friendly word; it does not distract them from their small solemn
preoccupation. But at his own door he turns to glance round and sees young Hergesell
push himself off the stair by his elbow-probably because he noticed the Professor. He
comes down into the arena, takes Ellie out of her brother's arms, and dances with her
himself. It looks very comic, without the music, and he crouches down just as Cornelius
does when he goes walking with the four gentlemen, holding the fluttered Ellie as though
she were grown up and taking little "shimmying" steps. Everybody watches with huge
enjoyment, the gramophone is put on again, dancing becomes general. The Professor
stands and looks, with his hand on the door-knob. He nods and laughs; when he finally
shuts himself into his study the mechanical smile still lingers on his lips.
 Again he turns over pages by his desk lamp, takes notes, attends to a few simple
matters. After a while he notices that the guests have forsaken the entrance ball for his
wife's drawingroom, into which there is a door from his own study as well. He hears their
voices and the sounds of a guitar being tuned. Herr Möller, it seems, is to sing-and does
so. He twangs the strings of his instrument and sings in a powerful bass a ballad in a
strange tongue, possibly Swedish. The Professor does not succeed in identifying it, 
though he listens attentively to the end, after which there is great applause. The sound is
deadened by the portière that hangs over the dividing door. The young bankclerk begins
another song. Cornelius goes softly in.
 It is half-dark in the drawing-room; the only light is from the shaded standard
lamp, beneath which Möller sits, on the divan, with his legs crossed, picking his strings.
His audience is grouped easily about; as there are not enough seats, some stand, and
more, among them many young ladies, are simply sitting on the floor with their hands
clasped round their knees or even with their legs stretched out before them. Hergesell sits
thus, in his dinner-jacket, next the piano, with Fräulein Plaichinger beside him. Frau
Cornelius is holding both children on her lap as she sits in her easy-chair opposite the
singer. Snapper, the Bæotian, begins to talk loud and clear in the middle of the song and
has to be intimidated with hushings and finger-shakings. Never, never would Ellie allow
herself to be guilty of such conduct. She sits there daintily erect and still on her mother's
knee. The Professor tries to catch her eye and exchange a private signal with his little
girl; but she does not see him. Neither does she seem to be looking at the singer. Her gaze
is directed lower down.
 Möller sings the "joli tambour": "Sire, mon roi, donnez-moi votre flue-"
 They are all enchanted. "How good!" Hergesell is heard to say, in the odd, nasally
condescending Hergesell tone. The next one is a beggar ballad, to a tune composed by
young Möller himself; it elicits a storm of applause: "Gypsy lassie a-goin' to the fair,
Huzza! Gypsy laddie a-goin' to be thereHuzza, diddlety umpty dido!"
 Laughter and high spirits, sheer reckless hilarity, reigns after this jovial ballad.
"Frightfully good!" Hergesell comments again, as before. Follows another popular song,
this time a Hungarian one; Möller sings it in its own outlandish tongue, and most
effectively. The Professor applauds with ostentation. It warms his heart and does him
good, this outcropping of artistic, historic, and cultural elements all amongst the
shimmying. He goes up to young Möller and congratulates him, talks about the songs and
their sources, and Möller promises to lend him a certain annotated book of folk-songs.
Cornelius is the more cordial because all the time, as fathers do, he has been comparing
the parts and achievements of this young stranger with those of his own son, and being
gnawed by envy and chagrin. This young Möller, he is thinking, is a capable bank-clerk
(though about Möller's capacity he knows nothing whatever) and has this special gift
besides, which must have taken talent and energy to cultivate. "And here is my poor Bert,
who knows nothing and can do nothing and thinks of nothing except playing the clown,
without even talent for that!" He tries to be just; he tells himself that, after all, Bert has
innate refinement; that probably there is a good deal more to him than there is to the
successful Moller; that perhaps he has even something of the poet in him, and his dancing
and table-waiting are due to mere boyish folly and the distraught times. But paternal envy
and pessimism win the upper hand; when Möller begins another song, Dr. Cornelius goes
back to his room: He works as before, with divided attention, at this and that, while it gets
on for seven o'clock. Then he remembers a letter he may just as well write, a short letter
and not very important, but letter-writing is wonderful for the way it takes up the time,
and it is almost half past when he has finished. At half past eight the Italian salad will be
served; so now is the prescribed moment for the Professor to go out into the wintry
darkness to post his letters and take his daily quantum of fresh air and exercise. They are
dancing again, and he will have to pass through the hail to get his hat and coat; but they 
are used to him now, he need not stop and beg them not to be disturbed. He lays away his
papers, takes up the letters he has written, and goes out. But he sees his wife sitting near
the door of his room and pauses a little by her easy-chair.
 She is watching the dancing. Now and then the big folk or some of their guests
stop to speak to her; the party is at its height, and there are more onlookers than these
two: blue-faced Ann is standing at the bottom of the stairs, in all the dignity of her
limitations. She is waiting for the children, who simply cannot get their fill of these
unwonted festivities, and watching over Snapper, lest his all too rich blood be churned to
the dangerpoint by too much twirling round. And not only the nursery but the kitchen
takes an interest: Xaver and the two ladies Hinterhofer are standing by the pantry door
looking on with relish. Fräulein Walburga, the elder of the two sunken sisters (the
culinary section-she objects to being called a cook), is a whimsical, good-natured sort,
brown-eyed, wearing glasses with thick circular lenses; the nose-piece is wound with a
bit of rag to keep it from pressing on her nose. Fräulein Cecilia is younger, though not so
precisely young either. Her bearing is as self-assertive as usual, this being her way of
sustaining her dignity as a former member of the middle class. For Fräulein Cecilia feels
acutely her descent into the ranks of domestic service. She positively declines to wear a
cap or other badge of servitude, and her hardest trial is on the Wednesday evening when
she has to serve the dinner while Xaver has his afternoon out. She hands the dishes with
averted face and elevated nose-a fallen queen; and so distressing is it to behold her
degradation that one evening when the little folk happened to be at table and saw her they
both with one accord burst into tears. Such anguish is unknown to young Xaver. He
enjoys serving and does it with an ease born of practice as well as talent, for he was once
a "piccolo." But otherwise he is a thorough-paced good-for-nothing and windbag-with
quite distinct traits of character of his own, as his long-suffering employers are always
ready to concede, but perfectly impossible and a bag of wind for all that. One must just
take him as he is, they think, and not expect figs from thistles. He is the child and product
of the disrupted times, a perfect specimen of his generation, follower of the revolution,
Boishevist sympathizer. The Professor's name for him is the "minuteman," because he is
always to be counted on in any sudden crisis, if only it address his sense of humour or
love of novelty, and will display therein amazing readiness and resource. But he utterly
lacks a sense of duty and can as little be trained to the performance of the daily round and
common task as some kinds of dog can be taught to jump over a stick. It goes so plainly
against the grain that criticism is disarmed. One becomes resigned. On grounds that
appealed to him as unusual and amusing he would be ready to turn out of his bed at any
hour of the night. But he simply cannot get up before eight in the morning, he cannot do
it, he will not jump over the stick. Yet all day long the evidence of this free and
untrammelled existence, the sound of his mouth-organ, his joyous whistle, or his raucous
but expressive voice lifted in song, rises to the hearing of the world above-stairs; and the
smoke of his cigarettes fills the pantry. While the Hinterhofer ladies work he stands and
looks on. Of a morning while the Professor is breakfasting, he tears the leaf off the study
calendar-but does not lift a finger to dust the room. Dr. Cornelius has often told him to
leave the calendar alone, for he tends to tear off two leaves at a time and thus to add to
the general confusion. But young Xaver appears to find joy in this activity, and will not
be deprived of it. 
 Again, he is fond of children, a winning trait. He will throw himself into games
with the little folk in the garden, make and mend their toys with great ingenuity, even
read aloud from their books-and very droll it sounds in his thick-lipped pronunciation.
With his whole soul he loves the cinema; after an evening spent there he inclines to
melancholy and yearning and talking to himself. Vague hopes stir in him that some day
he may make his fortune in that gay world and belong to it by rights-hopes based on his
shock of hair and his physical agility and daring. He likes to climb the ash tree in the
front garden, mounting branch by branch to the very top and frightening everybody to
death who sees him. Once there he lights a cigarette and smokes it as he sways to and fro,
keeping a lookout for a cinema director who might chance to come along and engage
him.
 If he changed his striped jacket for mufti, he might easily dance with the others
and no one would notice the difference. For the big folk's friends are rather anomalous in
their clothing: evening dress is worn by a few, but it is by no means the rule. There is
quite a sprinkling of guests, both male and female, in the same general style as Möller the
ballad-singer. The Professor is familiar with the circumstances of most of this young
generation he is watching as he stands beside his wife's chair; he has heard them spoken
of by name. They are students at the high school or at the School of Applied Art; they
lead, at least the masculine portion, that precarious and scrambling existence which is
purely the product of the time. There is a tall, pale, spindling youth, the son of a dentist,
who lives by speculation. From all the Professor hears, he is a perfect Aladdin. He keeps
a car, treats his friends to champagne suppers, and showers presents upon them on every
occasion, costly little trifles in mother-of-pearl and gold. So today he has brought gifts to
the young givers of the feast: for Bert a gold lead-pencil, and for Ingrid a pair of earrings
of barbaric size, great gold circlets that fortunately do not have to go through the little
ear-lobe, but are fastened over it by means of a clip. The big folk come laughing to their
parents to display these trophies; and the parents shake their heads even while they
admire-Aladdin bowing over and over from afar.
 The young people appear to be absorbed in their dancing-if the performance they
are carrying out with so much still concentration can be called dancing. They stride
across the carpet, slowly, according to some unfathomable prescript, strangely embraced;
in the newest attitude, tummy advanced and shoulders high, waggling the hips. They do
not get tired, because nobody could. There is no such thing as heightened colour or
heaving bosoms. Two girls may dance together or two young men-it is all the same. They
move to the exotic strains of the gramophone, played with the loudest needles to procure
the maximum of sound: shimmies, foxtrots, one-steps, double foxes, African shimmies,
Java dances, and Creole polkas, the wild musky melodies follow one another, now
furious, now languishing, a monotonous Negro programme in unfamiliar rhythm, to a
clacking, clashing, and strumming orchestral accompaniment.
 "What is that record?" Cornelius inquires of Ingrid, as she passes him by in the
arms of the pale young speculator, with reference to the piece then playing, whose
alternate languors and furies he finds comparatively pleasing and showing a certain
resourcefulness in detail.
 "Prince of Pappenheim: 'Console thee, dearest child,' "she answers, and smiles
pleasantly back at him with her white teeth. 
 The cigarette smoke wreathes beneath the chandelier. The air is blue with a festal
haze compact of sweet and thrilling ingredients that stir the blood with memories of
green-sick pains and are particularly poignant to those whose youth-like the Professor's
own-has been over-sensitive.... The little folk are still on the floor. They are allowed to
stay up until eight, so great is their delight in the party. The guests have got used to their
presence; in their own way, they have their place in the doings of the evening. They have
separated, anyhow: Snapper revolves all alone in the middle of the carpet, in his little
blue velvet smock, while Ellie is running after one of the dancing couples, trying to hold
the man fast by his coat. It is Max Hergesell and Fräulein Plaichinger. They dance well, it
is a pleasure to watch them. One has to admit that these mad modern dances, when the
right people dance them, are not so bad after all-they have something quite taking. Young
Hergesell is a capital leader, dances according to rule, yet with individuality. So it looks.
With what aplomb can he walk backwards-when space permits! And he knows how to be
graceful standing still in a crowd. And his partner supports him well, being unsuspectedly
lithe and buoyant, as fat people often are. They look at each other, they are talking,
paying no heed to Ellie, though others are smiling to see the child's persistence. Dr.
Cornelius tries to catch up his little sweetheart as she passes and draw her to him. But
Ellie eludes him, almost peevishly; her dear Abel is nothing to her now. She braces her
little arms against his chest and turns her face away with a persecuted look. Then escapes
to follow her fancy once more.
 The Professor feels an involuntary twinge. Uppermost in his heart is hatred for
this party, with its power to intoxicate and estrange his darling child. His love for her-that
not quite disinterested, not quite unexceptionable love of his-is easily wounded. He wears
a mechanical smile, but his eyes have clouded, and he stares fixedly at a point in the
carpet, between the dancers' feet.
 "The children ought to go to bed," he tells his wife. But she pleads for another
quarter of an hour; she has promised already, and they do love it so! He smiles again and
shakes his head, stands so a moment and then goes across to the cloak-room, which is full
of coats and hats and scarves and overshoes. He has trouble in rummaging out his own
coat, and Max Hergesell comes out of the hail, wiping his brow.
 "Going out, sir?" he asks, in Hergesellian accents, dutifully helping the older man
on with his coat. "Silly business this, with my pumps," he says. "They pinch like hell.
The brutes are simply too tight for me, quite apart from the bad leather. They press just
here on the ball of my great toe"-he stands on one foot and holds the other in his hand-
"it's simply unbearable. There's nothing for it but to take them off; my brogues will have
to do the business.... Oh, let me help you, sir."
 "Thanks," says Cornelius. "Don't trouble. Get rid of your own tormentors.... Oh,
thanks very much!" For Hergesell has gone on one knee to snap the fasteners of his
snow-boots.
 Once more the Professor expresses his gratitude; he is pleased and touched by so
much sincere respect and youthful readiness to serve. "Go and enjoy yourself," he
counsels. "Change your shoes and make up for what you have been suffering. Nobody
can dance in shoes that pinch. Good-bye, I must be off to get a breath of fresh air."
 "I'm going to dance with Ellie now," calls Hergesell after him. "She'll be a firstrate dancer when she grows up, and that I'll swear to." 
 "Think so?" Cornelius answers, already half out. "Well, you are a connoisseur,
I'm sure. Don't get curvature of the spine with stooping."
 He nods again and goes. "Fine lad," he thinks as he shuts the door. "Student of
engineering. Knows what he's bound for, got a good clear head, and so well set up and
pleasant too." And again paternal envy rises as he compares his poor Bert's status with
this young man's, which he puts in the rosiest light that his son's may look the darker.
Thus he sets out on his evening walk.
 He goes up the avenue, crosses the bridge, and walks along the bank on the other
side as far as the next bridge but one. The air is wet and cold, with a little snow now and
then. He turns up his coat-collar and slips the crook of his cane over the arm behind his
back. Now and then he ventilates his lungs with a long deep breath of the night air. As
usual when he walks, his mind reverts to his professional preoccupations, he thinks about
his lectures and the things he means to say tomorrow about Philip's struggle against the
Germanic revolution, things steeped in melancholy and penetratingly just. Above all just,
he thinks. For in one's dealings with the young it behoves one to display the scientific
spirit, to exhibit the principles of enlightenmentnot only for purposes of mental
discipline, but on the human and individual side, in order not to wound them or indirectly
offend their political sensibilities; particularly in these days, when there is so much tinder
in the air, opinions are so frightfully split up and chaotic, and you may so easily incur
attacks from one party or the other, or even give rise to scandal, by taking sides on a point
of history. "And taking sides is unhistoric anyhow," so he muses. "Only justice, only
impartiality is historic." And could not, properly considered, be otherwise.... For justice
can have nothing of youthful fire and blithe, fresh, loyal conviction. It is by nature
melancholy. And, being so, has secret affinity with the lost cause and the forlorn hope
rather than with the fresh and blithe and loyal-perhaps this affinity is its very essence and
without it it would not exist at all!... "And is there then no such thing as justice?" the
Professor asks himself, and ponders the question so deeply that he absently posts his
letters in the next box and turns round to go home. This thought of his is unsettling and
disturbing to the scientific mind-but is it not after all itself scientific, psychological,
conscientious, and therefore to be accepted without prejudice, no matter how upsetting?
In the midst of which musings Dr. Cornelius finds himself back at his own door.
 On the outer threshold stands Xaver, and seems to be looking for him.
 "Herr Professor," says Xaver, tossing back his hair, "go upstairs to Ellie straight
off. She's in a bad way."
 "What's the matter?" asks Cornelius in alarm. "Is she ill?"
 "No-o, not to say ill," answers Xaver. "She's just in a bad way and crying fit to
bust her little heart. It's along o' that chap with the shirt-front that danced with her-Herr
Hergesell. She couldn't be got to go upstairs peaceably, not at no price at all, and she's
Wen crying bucketfuls."
 "Nonsense," says the Professor, who has entered and is tossing off his things in
the cloak-room. He says no more; opens the glass door and without a glance at the guests
turns swiftly to the stairs. Takes them two at a time, crosses the upper hail and the small
room leading into the nursery. Xaver follows at his heels, but stops at the nursery door.
 A bright light still burns within, showing the gay frieze that runs all round the
room, the large row of shelves heaped with a confusion of toys, the rocking-horse on his
swaying platform, with red-varnished nostrils and raised hoofs. On the linoleum lie other 
toys-building blocks, railway trains, a little trumpet. The two white cribs stand not far
apart, Ellie's in the window corner, Snapper's out in the room.
 Snapper is asleep. He has said his prayers in loud, ringing tones, prompted by
Nurse, and gone off at once into vehement, profound, and rosy slumber-from which a
cannon-ball fired at close range could not rouse him. He lies with both fists flung back on
the pillows on either side of the tousled head with its funny crooked little slumber-tossed
wig.
 A circle of females surrounds Ellie's bed: not only blue-faced Ann is there, but the
Hinterhofer ladies too, talking to each other and to her. They make way as the Professor
comes up and reveal the child sitting all pale among her pillows, sobbing and weeping
more bitterly than he has ever seen her sob and weep in her life. Her lovely little hands lie
on the coverlet in front of her, the nightgown with its narrow lace border has slipped
down from her shoulder-such a thin, birdlike little shoulder-and the sweet head Cornelius
loves so well, set on the neck like a flower on its stalk, her head is on one side, with the
eyes rolled up to the corner between wall and ceiling above her head. For there she seems
to envisage the anguish of her heart and even to nod to it-either on purpose or because her
head wobbles as her body is shaken with the violence of her sobs. Her eyes rain down
tears. The bow-shaped lips are parted, like a little mater dolorosa's, and from them issue
long, low wails that in nothing resemble the unnecessary and exasperating shrieks of a
naughty child, but rise from the deep extremity of her heart and wake in the Professor's
own a sympathy that is well-nigh intolerable. He has never seen his darling so before. His
feelings find immediate vent in an attack on the ladies Hinterhofer.
 "What about the supper?" he asks sharply. "There must be a great deal to do. Is
my wife being left to do it alone?"
 For the acute sensibilities of the former middle class this is quite enough. The
ladies withdraw in righteous indignation, and Xaver Kleingutl jeers at them as they pass
out. Having been born to low life instead of achieving it, he never loses a chance to mock
at their fallen state.
 "Childie, childie," murmurs Cornelius, and sitting down by the crib enfolds the
anguished Ellie in his arms. "What is the trouble with my darling?"
 She bedews his face with her tears.
 "Abel... Abel..." she stammers between sobs. "Why-isn't Max-my brother? Max
ought to be-my brother!"
 Alas, alas! What mischance is this? Is this what the party has wrought, with its
fatal atmosphere? Cornelius glances helplessly up at blue-faced Ann standing there in all
the dignity of her limitations with her hands before her on her apron. She purses up her
mouth and makes a long face. "It's pretty young," she says, "for the female instincts to be
showing up."
 "Hold your tongue," snaps Cornelius, in his agony. He has this much to be
thankful for, that Ellie does not turn from him now; she does not push him away as she
did downstairs, but clings to him in her need, while she reiterates her absurd, bewildered
prayer that Max might be her brother, or with a fresh burst of desire demands to be taken
downstairs so that he can dance with her again. But Max, of course, is dancing with
Fraulein Plaichinger, that behemoth who is his rightful partner and has every claim upon
him; whereas Ellie-never, thinks the Professor, his heart torn with the violence of his pity,
never has she looked so tiny and birdlike as now, when she nestles to him shaken with 
sobs and all unaware of what is happening in her little soul. No, she does not know. She
does not comprehend that her suffering is on account of Fräulein Plaichinger, fat,
overgrown, and utterly within her rights in dancing with Max Hergesell, whereas Ellie
may only do it once, by way of a joke, although she is incomparably the more charming
of the two. Yet it would be quite mad to reproach young Hergesell with the state of
affairs or to make fantastic demands upon him. No, Ellie's suffering is without help or
healing and must be covered up. Yet just as it is without understanding, so it is also
without restraint-and that is what makes it so horribly painful. Xaver and blue-faced Ann
do not feel this pain, it does not affect them-either because of native callousness or
because they accept it as the way of nature. But the Professor's fatherly heart is quite torn
by it, and by a distressful horror of this passion, so hopeless and so absurd.
 Of no avail to hold forth to poor Ellie on the subject of the perfectly good little
brother she already has. She only casts a distraught and scornful glance over at the other
crib, where Snapper lies vehemently slumbering, and with fresh tears calls again for Max.
Of no avail either the promise of a long, long walk tomorrow, all five gentlemen, round
and round the diningroom table; or a dramatic description of the thrilling cushion games
they will play. No, she will listen to none of all this, nor to lying down and going to sleep.
She will not sleep, she will sit bolt upright and suffer.... But on a sudden they stop and
listen, Abel and Ellie; listen to something miraculous that is coming to pass, that is
approaching by strides,-two strides, to the nursery door, that now overwhelmingly
appears....
 It is Xaver's work, not a doubt of that. He has not remained by the door where he
stood to gloat over the ejection of the Hinterhofers. No, he has bestirred himself, taken a
notion; likewise steps to carry it out. Downstairs he has gone, twitched Herr Hergesell's
sleeve, and made a thick-lipped request. So here they both are. Xaver, having done his
part, remains by the door; but Max Hergesell comes up to Ellie's crib; in his dinnerjacket, with his sketchy side-whisker and charming black eyes; obviously quite pleased
with his role of swan knight and fairy prince, as one who should say: "See, here am I,
now all losses are restored and sorrows end!"
 Cornelius is almost as much overcome as Ellie herself.
 "Just look," he says feebly, "look who's here. This is uncommonly good of you,
Herr Hergesell."
 "Not a bit of it," says Hergesell. "Why shouldn't I come to say good-night to my
fair partner?"
 And he approaches the bars of the crib, behind which Ellie sits struck mute. She
smiles blissfully through her tears. A funny, high little note that is half a sigh of relief
comes from her lips, then she looks dumbly up at her swan knight with her goldenbrown
eyes-tear-swollen though they are, so much more beautiful than the fat Plaichinger's. She
does not put up her arms. Her joy, like her grief, is without understanding; but she does
not do that. The lovely little hands lie quiet on the coverlet, and Max Hergesell stands
with his arms leaning over the rail as on a balcony.
 "And now," he says smartly, "she need not 'sit the livelong night and weep upon
her bed'!" He looks at the Professor to make sure he is receiving due credit for the
quotation. "Ha ha!" he laughs, "she's beginning young. 'Console thee, dearest child!'
Never mind, you're all right! Just as you are you'll be wonderful! You've only got to grow 
up.... And you'll lie down and go to sleep like a good girl, now I've come to say goodnight? And not cry any more, little Lorelei?"
 Ellie looks up at him, transfigured. One birdlike shoulder is bare; the Professor
draws the lace-trimmed nighty over it. There comes into his mind a sentimental story he
once read about a dying child who longs to see a clown he had once, with unforgettable
ecstasy, beheld in a circus. And they bring the clown to the bedside marvellously arrayed,
embroidered before and behind with silver butterflies; and the child dies happy. Max
Hergesell is not embroidered, and Ellie, thank God, is not going to die, she has only been
"in a bad way." But, after all, the effect is the same. Young Hergesell leans over the bars
of the crib and rattles on, more for the father's ear than the child's, but Ellie does not
know that-and the father's feelings towards him are a most singular mixture of
thankfulness, embarrassment, and hatred.
 "Good night, little Lorelei," says Hergesell, and gives her his hand through the
bars. Her pretty, soft, white little hand is swallowed up in the grasp of his big, strong, red
one. "Sleep well," he says, "and sweet dreams! But don't dream about me-God forbid!
Not at your age-ha ha!" And then the fairy clown's visit is at an end. Cornelius
accompanies him to the door. "No, no, positively, no thanks called for, don't mention it,"
he largeheartedly protests; and Xaver goes downstairs with him, to help serve the Italian
salad.
 But Dr. Cornelius returns to Ellie, who is now lying down, with her cheek pressed
into her flat little pillow.
 "Well, wasn't that lovely?" he says as he smooths the covers. She nods, with one
last little sob. For a quarter of an hour he sits beside her and watches while she falls
asleep in her turn, beside the little brother who found the right way so much earlier than
she. Her silky brown hair takes the enchanting fall it always does when she sleeps; deep,
deep lie the lashes over the eyes that late so abundantly poured forth their sorrow; the
angelic mouth with its bowed upper lip is peacefully relaxed and a little open. Only now
and then comes a belated catch in her slow breathing.
 And her small hands, like pink and white flowers, lie so quietly, one on the
coverlet, the other on the pillow by her faceDr. Cornelius, gazing, feels his heart melt
with tenderness as with strong wine.
 "How good," he thinks, "that she breathes in oblivion with every breath she
draws! That in childhood each night is a deep wide gulf between one day and the next.
Tomorrow, beyond all doubt, young Hergesell will be a pale shadow, powerless to darken
her little heart. Tomorrow, forgetful of all but present joy, she will walk with Abel and
Snapper, all five gentlemen, round and round the table, will play the ever-thrilling
cushion game."
 Heaven be praised for that! 