OLD GABRIEL shuffled across the room waving his stick slowly sideways in front
of him.
“Who that?” he whispered, appearing in the doorway. “I smells fo’ niggers.”
Their soft, minor-toned laughter rose above the frog’s hum and blended into
voices.
“Cain’t you do no bettern that, Gabe?”
“Is you goin’ with us, Granpaw?”
“You oughter be able to smell good enough to git our names.”
Old Gabriel moved out on the porch a little way. “That Matthew an’ George
an’ Willie Myrick. An’ who that other?”
“This Boon Williams, Granpaw.”
Gabriel felt for the edge of the porch with his stick. “What yawl doin’? Set
down a spell.”
“We waitin’ on Mose an’ Luke.”
“We goin’ huntin’ that cat.”
“What yawl huntin’ him with?” old Gabriel muttered. “Yawl ain’t got nothin’
fit to kill a wildcat with.” He sat down on the edge of the porch and hung his feet
over the side. “I done tol’ Mose an’ Luke that.”
“How many wildcats you killed, Gabrul?” Their voices, rising to him through
the darkness, were full of gentle mockery.
“When I was a boy, there was a cat once,” Gabriel started. “It come ’round
here huntin’ blood. Come in through the winder of a cabin one night an’ sprung in
bed with a nigger an’ tore that nigger’s throat open befo’ he could holler good.”
“This cat in the woods, Granpaw. It jus’come out to git cows. Jupe Williams
seen it when he gone through to the sawmill.”
“What he done about it?”
“Started runnin’.” Their laughter broke over the night sounds again. “He
thought it was after him.”
“It was,” old Gabriel murmured.
“It after cows.”
Gabriel sniffed. “It comin’ out the woods for mo’ than cows. It gonna git itssef
some folks’ blood. You watch. An’ yawl goin’ off huntin’ it ain’t gonna do no
good. It goin’ huntin’ itssef. I been smellin’ it.”
“How you know that it you smellin’?”
“Ain’t no mistakin’ a wildcat. Ain’t been one ’round here since I was a boy.
Why don’t yawl set a spell?” he added.
“You ain’t afraid to stay here by yosef, is you, Granpaw?”
Old Gabriel stiffened. He felt for the post to pull himself up on. “Ef you
waitin’ on Mose an’ Luke,” he said, “you better git goin’. They started over to
yawl’s place an hour ago.”
II
“Come in here, I say! Come in here right now!”
The blind boy sat alone on the steps, staring ahead. “All the men gone?” he
called.
“All gone but ol’ Hezuh. Come in.”
He hated to go in—among the women.
“I smells it,” he said.
“You come in here, Gabriel.”
He went in and walked to where the window was. The women were muttering
at him.
“You stay in here, boy.”
“You be ’tractin’ that cat right in this room, settin’ out there.”
No air was coming through the window, and he scratched at the shutter latch to
open it.
“Don’t open that winder, boy. Us don’t want no wildcat jumpin’ in here.”
“I could er gone wit ’em,” he said sullenly. “I could er smelled it out. I ain’t
afraid.” Shut up wit these women like he one too.
“Reba say she kin smell it herself.”
He heard the old woman groan in the corner. “They ain’t gonna do no good out
huntin’ it,” she whined. “It here. It right around here. Ef it jump in this room it
gonna git me fust, then it gonna git that boy, then it gonna git.…”
“Hush yo’ mouth, Reba,” he heard his mother say. “I look after my boy.”
He could look after hissef. He warn’t afraid. He could smell it—him an’ Reba
could. It’d jump on them fust; fust Reba an’ then him. It was the shape of a reg’lar
cat only bigger, his mother said. An’ where you felt the sharp points on a house
cat’s foot, you felt big knife claws in a wildcat’s, an’ knife teeth, too; an’ it
breathed heat an’ spit wet lime. Gabriel could feel its claws in his shoulders and
its teeth in his throat. But he wouldn’t let ’em stay there. He’d lock his arms
’round its body an’ feel up for its neck an’ jerk its head back an’ go down wit it on
the floor until its claws dropped away from his shoulders. Beat, beat, beat its
head, beat, beat beat.…
“Who wit ol’ Hezuh?” one of the women asked.
“Jus’ Nancy.”
“Oughter be somebody else down there,” his mother said softly.
Reba moaned. “Anybody go out gonna git sprung on befo’ they gits there. It
around here, I say. It gittin’ closer an’ closer. It gonna git me sho.”
He could smell it strong.
“How it gonna git in here? Yawl jus’ frettin’ for nothin’.”
That was Thin Minnie. Nothin’ could git her. She’d had a spell on her since
when she was small—put there by a conjer woman.
“It come in easy ef it wanter,” Reba snorted. “It tear up that cat hole an’come
through.”
“We could be down to Nancy’s by then,” Minnie sniffed.
“Yawl could,” the old woman muttered.
Him an’ her couldn’t, he knew. But he’d stay an’ fight it. You see that blin’
boy there? He the one kill the wildcat!
Reba started groaning.
“Hush that!” his mother ordered.
The groaning turned into singing—low in her throat.
“Lord, Lord,
Gonna see yo’ pilgrim today.
Lord, Lord,
Gonna see yo’…”
“Hush!” his mother hissed. “What that I hear?”
Gabriel leaned forward in the silence; stiff, ready.
It was a thump, thump and maybe a snarl, away, muffled, and then a shriek, far
away, then louder and louder, closer and closer, over the edge of the hill into the
yard and up on the porch. The cabin was shaking with the weight of a body against
the door. There was the feel of a rush inside the room and the scream was let in.
Nancy!
“It got him!” she screamed. “Got him, sprung in through the winder, got him in
the throat. Hezuh,” she wailed, “ol’ Hezuh.”
Later in the night the men returned, carrying a rabbit and two squirrels.
III
Old Gabriel crept back through the darkness to his bed. He could sit in the chair a
while or he could lie down. He eased down in the bed and pushed his nose into
the feel and smell of the quilt. They won’t no use to do that. He could smell the
other jus’ the same. He had been smellin’ it, been smellin’ it ever since they
started talkin’ about it. There it was one evenin’—different from all the smells
around, different from niggers’ and cows’ an’ ground smells. Wildcat. Tull
Williams seen it jump on a bull.
Gabriel sat up suddenly. It was nearer. He got out the bed and pushed to the
door. He had bolted that one; the other must be open. A breeze was coming in and
he walked in it until he felt the night air full in his face. This one was open. He
slammed it shut and pushed the bolt in. What was the use to do that? Ef the cat
aimed on comin’ in, it could git there. He went back to the chair and sat down. It
come in east ef it wanta. There were little drafts all around him. By the door there
was a hole the hound could git under; that cat could gnaw it through an’ be in befo’
he got out. Maybe ef he sat by the back do’, he could git away quicker. He got up
and dragged his chair after him across the room. The smell was near. Maybe he’d
count. He could count to a thousand. Won’t no nigger for five miles could count
that fur. He started counting.
Mose an’ Luke wouldn’t be back for six hours yet. Tomorrow night they
wouldn’t go; but the cat was gonna git him tonight. Lemme go wit you boys an’
smell himout for you. I the onliest one kin smell ’round here.
They’d lose himin the woods, they’d said. Huntin’ wildcats won’t no business
for him.
I ain’t afraid er no wildcat er no woods neither. Lemme go wit you boys,
lemme go.
Ain’t no reason to be ’fraid to stay here by yosef, they’d laughed. Ain’t nothin’
gonna git you. We take you up the road to Mattie’s ef you scaird.
Mattie’s! Take him to Mattie’s! Settin’ wit the women. What yawl think I is? I
ain’t afraid er no wildcat. But it comin’, boys; an’ it ain’t gonna be in no woods—
it gonna be here. Yawl wastin’ yo’ time in the woods. Stay here an’ you ketch it.
He suppose to be countin’. Where he lef’ off at? Five hunnert an’ five, five
hunnert an’ six … Mattie’s! What they think he is? Five hunnert an’ two, five
hunnert an’.…
He sat stiff in the chair with his hands gripped tight to the stick across his
knees. It won’t gonna git himlike he was a woman. His shirt was stuck wet to him,
making him smell higher. The men had come back later in the night with a rabbit
and two squirrels. He began to remember the other wildcat and he remembered as
if he had been in Hezuh’s cabin instead of with the women. He wondered was he
Hezuh. He was Gabrul. It won’t gonna git him like Hezuh. He was gonna hit it. He
was gonna pull it off. He was gonna … how he gonna do all that? He hadn’t been
able to wring a chicken’s neck for fo’ years. It was gonna git him. Won’t nothin’ to
do but wait. The smell was near. Won’t nothin’ for old people to do but wait. It
was gonna git him tonight. The teeth would be hot an’ the claws cold. The claws
would sink in soft, an’ the teeth would cut sharp an’ scrape his bones inside.
Gabriel felt the sweat on himself. It kin smell me good’s I kin smell it, he
thought. I settin’ here smellin’ an’ it comin’ here smellin’. Two hunnert an’ fo’;
where he lef’ off at? Fo’ hunnert an’ five.…
There was a sudden scratching by the chimney. He sat forward, tense, tight-
throated. “Come on,” he whispered, “I here. I waitin’.” He couldn’t move. He
couldn’t make himself move. There was another scratching. It was the pain he
didn’t want. But he didn’t want the waiting either. “I here,” he—there was
another, just a small noise and then a flutter. Bats. His grip on the stick loosened.
He should have known that won’t it. It won’t no farther than the barn yet. What ail
his nose? What ail him? Won’t no nigger for hunnert miles could smell like he
could. He heard the scratching again, coming differently, coming from the corner
of the house where the cat hole was. Pick … pick … pick. That was a bat. He
knowd that was a bat. Pick … pick. “Here I is,” he whispered. Won’t no bat. He
braced his feet to get up. Pick. “Lord waitin’ on me,” he whispered. “He don’t
want me with my face tore open. Why don’t you go on, Wildcat, why you want
me?” He was on his feet now. “Lord don’t want me with no wildcat marks.” He
was moving toward the cat hole. Across on the river bank the Lord was waiting
on himwith a troupe of angels and golden vestments for himto put on and when he
came, he’d put on the vestments and stand there with the Lord and the angels,
judging life. Won’t no nigger for fifty miles fitter to judge than him. Pick. He
stopped. He smelled it right outside, nosing the hole. He had to climb onto
something! What he going toward it for? He had to get on something high! There
was a shelf nailed over the chimney and he turned wildly and fell against a chair
and shoved it up to the fireplace. He caught hold of the shelf and pulled himself
onto the chair and sprang up and backwards and felt the narrow shelf board under
him for an instant and then felt it sag and jerked his feet up and felt it crack
somewhere from the wall. His stomach flew inside him and stopped hard and the
shelf board fell across his feet and the rung of the chair hit against his head and
then, after a second of stillness, he heard a low, gasping animal cry wail over two
hills and fade past him; then snarls, tearing short, furious, through the pain wails.
Gabriel sat stiff on the floor.
“Cow,” he breathed finally. “Cow.”
Gradually he felt his muscles loosen. It got to her befo’ him. It would go on off
now, but it would be back tomorrer night. He rose shaking from the chair and
stumbled to his bed. The cat had been a half mile away. He won’t sharp like he
used to be. They shouldn’t leave old people by theyselves. He done tole ’em they
won’t gonna ketch nothin’ off in no woods. Tomorrer night it would come back.
Tomorrer night they would stay here an’ kill it. Now he want to sleep. He done
tole ’em they couldn’t get no wildcat in no woods. He the one tole ’em where it
gonna be. They’d a listened to him, they’d done had it by now. When he die he
want to be sleepin’ in a bed; didn’t want to be on no floor with a wildcat stuck in
his face. Lord waitin’.
When he woke up, the darkness was full of morning things. He heard Mose and
Luke at the stove and smelled the side meat in the skillet. He reached for his snuff
and filled his lip. “What yawl ketch?” he asked trenchantly.
“Ain’t caught nothin’ las’ night.” Luke put the plate in his hands. “Here yo’
side meat. How you bust that shelf?”
“Ain’t busted no shelf,” old Gabriel muttered. “Wind to’ it down and waked
me up in the middle of the night. It been due to fall. You ain’t never built nothin’
yet stayed together.”
“We sot a trap,” Mose said. “We git that cat tonight.”
“Yawl sho will, boys,” Gabriel said. “It’ll be right here tonight. Ain’t it done
kill a cow a half a mile fromhere las’ night?”
“That don’t mean it comin’ this way,” Luke said.
“It comin’ this way,” Gabriel said.
“How many wildcats you killed, Granpaw?”
Gabriel stopped; the plate of side meat tremored in his hand. “I knows what I
knows, boy.”
“We git it soon. We sot a trap over in Ford’s Woods. It been around there. We
goin’ up in a tree over the trap every night an’ wait ’til we gits it.”
Their forks were scraping back and forth over their tin plates like knife teeth
against stone.
“You wants sommo’ side meat, Granpaw?”
Gabriel put his fork down on the quilt. “No, boy,” he said, “no mo’ side
meat.” The darkness was hollow around him and through its depth, animal cries
wailed and mingled with the beats pounding in his throat.